Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 2021

Analytical Insights
worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment

HARNESSING ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE FOR DEVELOPMENT
IN THE POST-COVID-19 ERA
A Review of National AI
Strategies and Policies

THE GLOBAL AI LANDSCAPE
Artificial intelligence (AI) has rapidly emerged as an important topic for the global development agenda.
Policymakers are increasingly curious about how they can design an enabling environment for this new
technology to not only thrive, but also accelerate progress towards sustainable development goals. AI’s
trajectory has been driven by rapidly increasing amounts of data, advances in machine learning algorithms
and more powerful processing power than ever before. Increasing global digital connectivity is also
supporting the growth of AI, through the expansion of broadband networks and adoption of digital
platforms and cloud computing services.
The Covid-19 pandemic is also yielding new and innovative AI applications and solutions to help manage
the spread of the virus, drive drug discovery and cope with social distancing requirements (OECD 2020).
At the onset of the pandemic, AI was used to monitor the spread of the virus and predict where and
when new outbreaks might occur (Raju et al. 2020). AI was widely used to accelerate the speed of vaccine
research, yielding multiple vaccines in record time (Arshadi and others 2020). AI was also used to power
web and mobile-based chatbots such as the World Health Organization’s Health Alerts or the Center for
Disease Control’s Covid-19 portal to help people find information quickly as well as conduct self-diagnosis
for coronavirus infection at home; these portals were emulated in many developing countries (Miner et al.
2020). And as the pandemic enters the vaccination phase, applications for AI are now being explored to
inform triage planning across population groups, forecast demand, help manage supply chains and postvaccination surveillance of any adverse drug reactions (Kahn & Vanian 2021).

1

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

However, the development of AI technologies
remains heavily concentrated in a small number of
advanced economies (Oxford Insights 2020). These
countries are characterized by a strong local talent
pool, a robust research and innovation base and
access to capital to fuel growth through investments
(Loucks and others 2019). Countries that lack these
conditions and resources are at risk of missing out
on the economic and developmental benefits that
could be derived from this technology. This has
immediate implications for global recovery efforts
in the post-Covid era, considering AI’s potential
to help developing countries rebuild quickly
across critical sectors once the pandemic subsides
(Sonneborn & Graf 2020).

a national strategic direction for AI defined by
their governments. Governments often try to
shape the way in which new technologies affect
market structure and societal outcomes. This is
attempted in many ways, but one common feature
is overarching national policy or strategies for
technology development and adoption. These are
intended to articulate government objectives and
to shape their interventions in a way that supports
its overall mission. Many countries have designed
such policies and strategies towards AI, including
countries that rank high in global indexes that
benchmark key indicators of AI ecosystems such as
Stanford’s Global AI Index1 and the Oxford Insights
Government AI Readiness Index.2

Countries that have seen early and broad
adoption of AI such as South Korea, Canada and
China demonstrate another common feature:

The primary objective of this working paper is to
develop a better understanding of governments’
approaches to AI by presenting findings from a

1 https://hai.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ai_index_2019_report.pdf
2 https://www.oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readiness-index-2020

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment

2

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

review of national AI strategies from around the
world. It also includes a more detailed analysis
of the strategic approaches taken by two early
adopters. This article is organized in four sections.
The first section discusses the increasing global
AI divide in terms of availability of investments,
talent and research before further exploring
the balance of opportunities and risks of AI for
developing countries. This section also notes the
roles of different stakeholders in supporting AI
development within countries. The second section
presents details of eight policy domains and six

categories of tools and instruments that were used
to assess national AI strategies. The third section
presents findings from eleven countries, beginning
with a more detailed analysis of the national AI
policies of Finland and the United Arab Emirates
(UAE). This section also includes findings from an
analysis of a broader set of countries in Asia, Africa
and South America, highlighting the approach
taken to AI in some developing countries. The final
section highlights future areas of research needed
to expand upon this work.

GLOBAL DIVIDES IN AI INVESTMENTS, TALENT AND RESEARCH
Investment in AI startups over the past decade has
been dominated by the United States (US) and China
(CB Insights 2019). A few other OECD countries
including Japan, Sweden, Germany and France, as
well as Russia and South Korea have also generated
significant investment in AI (OECD 2019b). In
terms of human capital, AI talent is also scarce and
unequally distributed across industries, sectors, and
countries. More than half of the population in the
developing world lacks basic digital skills (World
Bank 2019a), and the vast majority of those with
digital skills lack more advanced skills in AI and
machine learning (Gaskell 2020). The shortage of
AI talent is even more acute amongst women, who
remain highly underrepresented in the field (Gagne

and others 2020). The inadequate supply of highly
skilled AI workers being produced combined with
the movement of skilled workers to high-income
countries means that there is a shortage of AI
scientists in developing countries, particularly
countries that lack AI research and industry hubs
(McKinsey Global Institute 2020). Many countries
therefore face a challenging problem of not only
developing, but also retaining local AI talent. The
constraints on investment and workforce talent
inputs reflects the globally asymmetric outputs in
AI research and development (R&D), which are
concentrated in just a small number of countries
(Savage 2020).

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
3

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

AI and the Development
Agenda: Opportunities
and Risks
Globally, significant gains in overall productivity
and economic growth have been projected from
new AI related product offerings and improved
supply chains. Deloitte (2019) estimates a $6.4
trillion global AI market by 2025, while PwC
(2017) estimates a 14% increase in global GDP in
2030 because of AI adoption, the equivalent of an
additional $15.7 trillion. These economic forecasts
are being supported by the rapid uptake of AI in
transport, agriculture, finance, advertising and
marketing, science, health care, criminal justice,
security and the public sector (Deloitte 2019).
However, adoption of AI in many markets is still at
an early stage, and much of its capability is yet to be
tapped, particularly in developing countries.

agribusiness, financial services, manufacturing and
gender equality. AI-driven risk management may
yield another major opportunity for developing
countries, including disease prevention and
natural disaster and crisis management (Strusani &
Houngbonon 2019).

AI applications have the potential to address some
challenging societal problems and provide solutions
to achieving targets in each of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). AI innovation and
adoption has the potential to help progress towards
goals in education, climate change, disaster relief,
health care and the delivery of public sector
services, representing some of the most critical
cross-sectoral SDG domains for developing
countries (Vinuesa et al. 2020). A recent report by
the IFC (2020) provides a comprehensive overview
of AI development opportunities across several key
sectors including power, transport, smart homes,

Alongside the potential benefits for developing
countries, AI technologies are also associated
with risks such as control, inequality and market
concentration, amongst others. AI technologies
can be used for surveillance applications, tracking
individuals across digital, smart and connected
devices, while powerful pattern recognition
technologies can be used to identify individuals

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
4

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

and personal information in training datasets
(Lyon 2009). Access to personal data can be
exploited to predict and track individuals and
groups and their behavior while governments and
other actors can use facial recognition technologies
to boost surveillance capabilities (Feldstein 2019).
Furthermore, AI-generated realistic audio and
video (“deep fakes”) and hyper personalized
disinformation campaigns can manipulate,

persuade, and deceive citizens (Brundage and
others 2018). In a commercial setting, the imbalance
in power between data collectors and processors
and the individuals providing their data may result
in undesirable market outcomes (Klein 2020). In
the case of governments, these technologies raise
individual privacy concerns and can be used in
ways that infringe human rights and individual
freedoms (Risse 2018).

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
5

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

AI also threatens to contribute to widening income
inequality in countries with greater disparities in
access to education and high-skilled employment.
While there is no consensus about the future
impact of AI on jobs (Winick 2018), there is
concern that AI will be linked to further worsening
income inequalities both between countries and
within countries (ILO 2018). Many types of jobs –
particularly those that are comprised of routine and
predictable tasks – are susceptible to automation
using existing technologies (World Bank 2016). The
further development and adoption of AI, alongside
advances in robotization, can accelerate this process
of automation, putting jobs at risk (ILO 2018). This
process could widen existing inequalities across
gender, education, rural vs. urban, age and income.

systems exacerbate this problem (Floridi and others
2018). As AI systems begin to play a bigger role in
decision-making processes in critical areas such
as healthcare, education and criminal justice, such
problems are likely to become more widespread
and have more pressing political significance.
Market concentration is another potential risk of
AI, due to the high levels of investment required
for technology development. Well-resourced
technology companies are able to collect more
data, hire top talent and are able to build significant
hardware and computing capabilities. Access to
high quality training datasets, and the analysis that
these companies are able to undertake using them,
may give them an advantage which competitors
would find difficult to challenge. In this way, firstmover advantage and economies of scale benefit
a handful of large players and result in market
concentration (ITU 2018).

Additionally, the bias in some AI applications may
reproduce and aggravate social marginalization for
underrepresented groups. Biased analysis occurs
when training datasets for machine learning
models are either incomplete or unrepresentative of
the entire population or range of examples (Smith
& Rustagi 2020). As developing countries are less
represented in digital data, and AI technologies
are primarily formulated in developed countries,
machine learning models could result in outcomes
that are inaccurate, unsafe and may discriminate
unfairly against underrepresented groups (Shankar
and others 2017; Mehrabi and others 2019). The
lack of explainability and accountability of some AI

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
6

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

STAKEHOLDERS INVOLVED WITH SHAPING NATIONAL AI STRATEGIES
In the context of a rapidly evolving technology
landscape, some governments have developed
national AI strategies and policies to steer the
development and adoption of the technology in
order to manage the potential risks and rewards
of AI. A multi-stakeholder approach can help
facilitate appropriate policymaking and deliver
national AI strategies. The private sector, civil
society and academia, international organizations
and governments can all shape and/or support
national AI strategies, as with national innovation
strategies more broadly (Sharif 2006).

private sector a crucial actor in AI development.
The private sector – including large enterprises,
small and mid-size enterprises (SMEs) and startups – plays a dominant role in the innovation,
development and application of AI in the digital
economy. AI research and product development
is increasingly led by large technology companies
which can afford to hire top talent, capture
and obtain better data and employ large-scale
computing facilities, experimentation labs and
testbeds for product design. While more limited in
scalability and resources, SMEs have an important
role to play with diffusion of AI technology on
the supply side, and adoption and usage of AI on
the demand side. Start-ups can also help expand
the overall AI ecosystem as they seek out scalable
business models. Dynamic entrepreneurship and

The Role of the Private Sector
The intertwined relationship between AI
development and the digital economy makes the

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
7

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

well-developed innovation ecosystems can drive
technology diffusion in new areas, with a growing
number of start-ups developing AI applications for
new and different contexts. One key way the private
sector can help shape national AI strategies is
through providing comments during consultation
periods, where feedback on strategy proposals is
solicited by government planning bodies, such as
in Brazil. 3

International forums such as the G20 and G7,
organizations such as the UN, ITU, OECD
and UNESCO and supranational and regional
organizations such as the African Union can
coordinate policies and pool resources across
countries to devise and implement AI strategies.
Policies at international levels can also help to define
and monitor regulation, practices, and standards in
AI applications. Some international organizations
have already proposed guidelines and approaches
for building capabilities for governing AI, often
leveraging soft law. The UN High-Level Panel on
Digital Cooperation for example was convened by
the UN Secretary-General to advance global multistakeholder dialogue regarding the potential of
digital technologies to advance human wellbeing
while mitigating any risks of these technologies.4
The UN and the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) have also taken steps towards
international coordination by articulating an
approach for the UN system to support AI adoption
in developing countries and by hosting the annual
AI for Good conference. UN agencies also apply
a baseline of standards in countries that may lack
regulatory regimes, which can ultimately help guide
and shape the formulation of national AI strategies.

The Role of International and
Regional Organizations

International organizations also work on
harmonizing data protection regulation across
regions and promote access to data and markets.

3 http://participa.br/profile/estrategia-brasileira-de-inteligencia-artificial
4 United Nations, Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital

Cooperation, https://www.un.org/en/digital-cooperation-panel/. Its final
report (UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel 2019) makes five sets
of recommendations: i) Build an inclusive digital economy and society,
ii) Develop human and institutional capacity, iii) Protect human rights
and human agency, iv) Promote digital trust, security and stability, and v)
Foster global digital cooperation. The final report was submitted in June
2019 for a broad consultation process on the topics covered in the report.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
8

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

The European Single Digital Market demonstrates
one such example of a framework designed to
facilitate access and trade concerning digital data.
Similarly, the EU-AU Digital Economy Task Force
(EU-AU DETF) is a platform for partnerships
between the private sector, donors, international
organizations, financial institutions and civil
society to progress African digital transformation
for cross-border digital integration and to bring
benefits to all citizens (AI-HLEG 2019). In Asia, the
ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance
aims to harmonize data standards, data governance
or data protection frameworks regionally to enable
5
innovation, cross-border trade and cybersecurity.
While there is varying degree of involvement
amongst countries reviewed in this study, the role of
international and regional organizations in shaping
national AI strategies continues to grow.

workshops to discuss challenges and support local
practitioners and start-ups.7 Additionally, citizen
and civil society engagement and involvement
in AI policymaking is often used to build trust
in AI adoption among society. This can transpire
through public consultations and workshops to
inform the development of AI policies. Universities
and academic institutions also play an active role in
supporting local AI research and applications.

The Role of Government
The role of government in conceiving and developing
an AI strategy varies from a hands-off approach,
to providing a suitable enabling environment, to
more active direction of AI initiatives. While some
countries have taken a laissez-faire approach, this
is not prevalent among countries leading in AI
adoption. An examination of the early adopters of
national AI strategies shows that the government’s
role typically varies from active driving of initiatives
on AI development and providing a supportive
environment for stakeholders, to playing a more
passive facilitating role, as noted in Box 1. While
various stakeholders participate in implementing
AI strategies, governments play a fundamental
role in setting AI policy direction and accelerating
development and adoption. They can also lead AI
adoption in public services to improve outcomes
in health care, education, transportation, and
administrative efficiency.

The Role of Civil Society and Academia
Civil society and nonprofit organizations can
serve as an independent monitor to influence
the adoption and practice of trustworthy AI
applications. They can further facilitate the
scalability of capacity development programs for
AI adoption. Examples include the ‘Ghana Code
Club,’ which provides an after-school program for
6
teaching programming skills; and City. AI, a global
nonprofit organization comprised of a network of
AI practitioners who organize local meet-ups and

5 ASEAN Framework on Digital Data Governance, https://asean.org/storage/2012/05/6B-ASEAN-Framework-on-Digital-Data-Governance_Endorsed.pdf
6 Ghana Code Club, https://ghanacodeclub.org/pages/about
7 City.AI (https://city.ai/) focuses on practical discussions and meet-ups to help local AI practitioners and start-ups with challenges ranging from technical

to business models. As an example, City.AI held its first event in South Africa in March 2018, with local AI practitioners in Cape Town. The goal was to
encourage peers to share their actionable advice and insights on applied AI experience. See Edwards 2018.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
9

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

BOX 1: Different Government Approaches for Driving AI Policies

DIRECTING GOVERNMENT

In this approach governments play a leading role in directing the design and execution of national
strategies, including elements of coordination among stakeholders.

ENABLING GOVERNMENT

An enabler government plays a less direct role while still collaborating across stakeholders to enable
and support innovation. Government involvement focuses on supporting the private sector and
building a regulatory and market environment conducive to innovation.

LAISSEZ-FAIRE GOVERNMENT

This approach relies primarily on private sector markets to drive AI innovation.

National Artificial Intelligence Strategies,12 Tortois’
Global AI Index spotlighting G20 nations,13 the
European Commission’s AI Watch,14 HolonIQ’s
AI Strategy Landscape (2020) 15 which represents
one of the largest reviews covering 50 countries
and CIFAR’s Report on National and Regional AI
Strategies (Dutton et al. 2020), which embarked
on one of the earliest global reviews of national
AI strategies in 2017. This report complements
the existing literature with a review of different
government approaches to AI across eleven
countries at varying levels of national digital
development.

While there is much variation in the form a
strategy takes – from a public announcement, to a
guiding document, to a more comprehensive plan
– governments are uniquely situated to consider
the risks and opportunities of AI within their own
national contexts and provide strategic direction.
Previous research that has explored and compared
national AI strategies and policies includes the
8
annual Stanford AI Index (2021), the OECD AI
Policy Observatory launched in 2020,9 the annual
Oxford Insights Government AI Readiness Index
10
(2020), the Future of Life Institute’s review of
National and International AI Strategies,11 AiLab’s

8 https://aiindex.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/2021-AI-Index-Report_Master.pdf
9 https://www.oecd.ai/
10 https://www.oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readiness-index-2020
11 https://futureoflife.org/national-international-ai-strategies/
12 https://www.ailab.com.au/research/national-artificial-intelligence-strategies/
13 https://www.theglobalaisummit.com/FINAL-Spotlighting-the-g20-Nations-Report.pdf
14 https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/ai-watch/national-strategies-artificial-intelligence_en
15 https://www.holoniq.com/notes/50-national-ai-strategies-the-2020-ai-strategy-landscape/

10

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

CASE SELECTION, INFORMATION GATHERING AND APPROACH TO ANALYSIS
The eleven countries reviewed for this study
were selected based on four criteria: maturity
of a country’s AI ecosystem, level of digital
development, geographic location and level of
economic development. Finland and the UAE
were selected for more detailed analysis due to
their early adopter status of AI technology, with
both governments ranking in the top 20 for AI
readiness in the year this review commenced.16 The
findings presented reflect information on national
strategies and policies that was gathered from

available documents and interviews with experts
and advisors between February 2019-July 2020.
Once the findings were collected, the approach
was to review the content of national AI policy
and strategy documents using a matrix of variables
based on previous research on this subject (Dutton
et al. 2018; European Commission 2018). Overall,
a matrix of eight policy domain areas and six policy
tools and instruments to implement national AI
strategies were used for understanding the role of
government, which is illustrated using heatmaps.

16 https://www.oxfordinsights.com/ai-readiness2019

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
11

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Eight Policy Domains within AI Strategies
National strategies target a range of sub-goals
or domain areas. Based on work by Dutton
et al (2018) and the findings of the European
Commission’s Coordinated Plan on Artificial
Intelligence published in 201817, the variety of subgoals in national AI strategies can be categorized in
the following eight domain areas. These represent
distinct thematic areas that are the object of
policymaking to accelerate AI development and
adoption at the country level. These domains are
influenced by various tools and instruments as
described in the subsequent section, which in
turn can simultaneously target multiple domains
noted below:

policies, partnerships, and programs to prepare the
labor force for changing skills demands, including
STEM education and digital and AI skills training
in new learning models.
3.
Entrepreneurial
ecosystem:
Policy
approaches for supporting entrepreneurs include
reducing the regulatory or tax burden for start-ups,
or direct funding for new AI start-ups.
4.
Standards for ethical or trustworthy AI:
Policies and measures to uphold ethics, safety and
security in the development and use of AI, such as
regulation for data privacy, funding research into
explainable AI or developing or endorsing ethical
guidelines.

1.
Scientific research: Policies include the
creation of new research centers, hubs, partnerships
or programs in AI research.

5.
Data access: Policies to increase access
to quality data for machine learning models by
improving data sharing infrastructures and rules
for data portability. Initiatives include opening
public datasets, creating new open data platforms,
data marketplaces, data trusts or local annotated
datasets.

2.
AI talent development: Policies include
measures to train domestic talent or to attract
and retain international talent, including funding
for AI-specific Master’s degree, PhD and other
academic programs. This category also includes

17 https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/coordinated-plan-artificial-intelligence

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
12

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

6.
AI adoption in the public sector: Policies
to accelerate the adoption and use of AI in the
public sector to improve public service performance
outcomes and efficiency. Approaches include PPPs,
piloting programs, AI training courses for public
administrators and spreading awareness about AI
opportunities.

Approaches include fostering partnerships between
technology companies and sectoral or industry
actors, funding or support for national champions
in target sectors, and spreading awareness about
opportunities for productivity and efficiency gains.
8.
Building capabilities for AI governance:
Policies include consultations with, and forming
advisory bodies of, industry and academic experts,
public consultations and pilots for applications of
AI to learn about opportunities and risks.

7.
Strategic sectoral targeting of AI: Policies
to accelerate the adoption and application of AI to
boost productivity and efficiency in key sectors.

Six Tools and Instruments
to Implement National AI Strategies
1.
Legal and regulatory reforms: This form of
hard law refers to the safeguarding of basic human
rights and values and enforcing safety and ethical
precautions. Reforms can clarify rules or support
innovation, for example through strengthening
intellectual property regimes or competition policy.
Use of regulatory sandboxes can also provide
testing environments with relaxed rules to support
the development of AI.

There are a range of policy tools and instruments
to implement the components of AI strategies,
and the choice and combination of tools depends
on national and industrial contexts. While the
government is a lead facilitator for several tools
such as legal and regulatory reform, the private
sector, academia and civil society might lead others
such as establishing new research centers and skills
training programs. In some areas, the boundary
between tools and instruments is less defined, and
there is some overlap. The tools and instruments
that were used in this review of national strategies
were developed and refined through consultation
between The Future Society18and The World Bank
team.

2.
Expansion of public services and
programs: This includes public services
and programs that support development of
entrepreneurship and innovation – particularly in
AI talent development and data access. Expansion

18 The Future Society was engaged by the World Bank to carry out research

and write a background report which has informed this working paper.
For more information see https://thefuturesociety.org/

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
13

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

4.
Multi-stakeholder partnerships: This
includes partnerships and engagements with
other stakeholders to implement AI strategies.
These engagements include public consultations,
collaborations with industry to define technical or
ethical standards and public-private partnerships
(PPPs) for AI adoption in key public services.

of public services and programs can support
several AI strategy domains around AI talent and
skills development. This includes education reform
targeting STEM or other relevant skills and offering
new training programs for machine learning and
digital skills. It also includes increasing salaries for
public sector researchers and expanding benefits
such as maternity/paternity leave and childcare
to help attract skilled talent. This category also
includes public-sector led initiatives and projects
for AI adoption in public services, such as the
establishment of open data initiatives and platforms
or data trusts or exchanges. This also includes pilot
studies to explore the impacts of AI, and training
programs for public administration regarding AI
capabilities and skills.

5.
New centers and collaborations: This
refers to collaborations among research centers and
scientists to pool resources (funding, technology,
human capital, expertise) across regions to
overcome shortcomings at local levels. This also
includes national centers of excellence to bolster
scientific research, AI talent development and
entrepreneurial activity. This category also includes
development of digital innovation hubs (DIH) and
clusters to connect SMEs, industry and academia to
share expertise and resources.

3.
Soft law, standards and industry selfregulation: Soft law refers to technical standards,
norms and codes of ethics and conduct. It
addresses some of the rigidity, time-lag and other
shortcomings of standard policymaking processes.
Soft law also includes industry self-regulation.

6.
Strategic investments and funding:
Avenues for funding can include public
procurement, research grants, awards or “grand

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
14

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

challenges.” The public sector can support the
creation of new research centers or programs in
basic or applied AI research or provide direct
investment for start-ups to compensate for
shortages in venture capital funding. Funding can
target specific research needs based on priorities,

including projects using AI applications for
societal good such as biomedicine, education
or climate research. This category also includes
scholarship funding for Master’s degree or PhD
students in machine learning.

FINDINGS FROM A REVIEW OF NATIONAL AI STRATEGIES
This section presents emerging practices in AI
policymaking across a broad geographic range of
eleven countries. It begins with a more detailed re-

view of the national AI strategies of Finland and the
UAE to better understand the actions and motives
of early AI-adopter countries.

Finland’s National AI Strategy
Finland was among the first European countries
to launch an AI strategy in October 2017,19 and its
latest AI strategy document was published in June
20
2019. Finland has one of the most advanced digital
economies in Europe and is well positioned to reap
the benefits of AI technologies (Foley and others
2020). Their 2019 AI strategy positions Finland
as a piloting environment spearheaded by agile,
innovation-friendly public administration and
enabling legislation. However, it recognizes that the
country lacks economies of scale, internationally
connected companies and foreign direct investment,
and exhibits slow commercialization. Finland’s
2019 AI strategy report identifies eleven areas of
action, as outlined in Figure 1.

19 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/160391/TEMrap_47_2017_verkkojulkaisu.pdf
20 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/handle/10024/161688

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
15

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

FIGURE 1: Finland’s National AI Strategy: 11 Key Actions

1. INCREASING COMPETITIVENESS OF FINNISH COMPANIES THROUGH AI
2. INCREASING USE OF DATA AND DATA AVAILABILITY
3. SPEEDING UP THE DEPLOYMENT OF AI
4. ATTRACTING AI TALENT AND EXPERTS
5. INCREASING INVESTMENTS IN AI
6. AUGMENTING PUBLIC SERVICES WITH AI
7. CREATING NEW TYPES OF COLLABORATION
8. RAISING FINLAND’S PROFILE AND BECOMING A LEADER IN AI APPLICATIONS
9. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE OF WORK
10. CREATING TRUST-BASED AND HUMAN-CENTERED AI, BEING A LEADER IN AI ETHICS
11. ADDRESSING CYBERSECURITY AND SAFETY CHALLENGES OF AI TECHNOLOGIES

Finnish AI strategy exhibits a mostly bottom-up
approach, leveraging several multi-stakeholder
consultations to form the basis of their strategy.
Their initial 2017 strategy document states this call
21
for multi-stakeholder consultation, which informed
the foundation of proposals in their 2019 strategy
document which includes the eleven key actions in
Figure 1 and some specific measures for fostering
AI.22 The government places significant value in

learning from different actors. The representatives
they invited included people from the private and
public sectors, research institutes and employers,
and also included employees, individual experts
and influencers to form the basis of the steering
group and its subgroups. Citizen participation was
also encouraged through online platforms that
facilitated interaction and discussion on a variety
23
of queries around AI.

21 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/160391/TEMrap_47_2017_verkkojulkaisu.pdf ; 61-63
22 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/161688/41_19_Leading%20the%20way%20into%20the%20age%20of%20artificial%20intelligence.pdf; 12.
23 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/160391/TEMrap_47_2017_verkkojulkaisu.pdf ; 68.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
16

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Overall the Finnish government mostly acts as a
facilitator, focusing on creating platforms, networks
and ecosystems for AI innovation to emerge from
the bottom up. One illustrative example of this
bottom-up process is their approach to ethical
guidelines. Rather than issuing ethical principles
for companies to apply, the Finnish strategy set up
an ecosystem – the AI Finland Ethics Challenge
– where companies could commit themselves
to devising ethical guidelines anchored in their
practice which can then be shared with each
24
other. The Finnish AI strategy seeks to position
the government within public-private-people
partnerships and actively explores cross-sectoral
models of collaboration to support AI.

with NVIDIA to establish a joint AI technology
center. This collaboration provides the Finnish
AI ecosystem with significant computing power,
graphical processing units (GPU) and AI software
for AI applications for research and industry use
(FCAI 2020). Finland has also set up a 5G network
pilot (5GTNF) with private partners and research
and academic partners to establish an environment
for research and business development purposes.26
Finland’s government has directly invested
towards various AI capacity building initiatives
including research, learning reform, data
management and computational infrastructure.
In 2018 the government announced €160 million
for AI investment, which includes €34 million
in funding for the AI Business program,27 a fund
which focuses on developing new value from AI
and the platform economy.28 This program has
been authorized to allocate €100 million in funds
over a four-year period to Finnish-registered
startups, SMEs and larger companies engaging
in AI research and development, and €60 million
in capital loans to ‘growth engines.’29 In terms of
economic impact, Finland is forecast to achieve a
€20 billion increase in GDP by 2023, equivalent
to an additional 8% (Microsoft & PwC 2018).
Overall, a review of Finland’s national AI strategy
illustrates a government that is focused on engaging
stakeholders, developing partnerships and acting
as a facilitator to drive AI development.

Finland’s government acknowledges the need to
build digital ecosystems and platforms to fortify the
foundation needed to enable AI development and
applications. As Finland’s small population impedes
the development of such platforms, the country
directs its efforts to building digital platforms
that are scalable. Finland is prominent in the EU’s
Digital Single Market and works on digitalization
and designing human-centered platforms scalable
to the European Union such as MyData – a personal
data management platform that seeks to develop an
internationally scalable interoperability model for
personal data management.25 Additionally, in order
to accelerate AI research and adoption in Finland,
the Finnish Center for AI (FCAI) has partnered

24 https://www.tekoalyaika.fi/en/background/ethics/
25 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/161688/41_19_Leading%20the%20way%20into%20the%20age%20of%20artificial%20intelligence.pdf; 52-57
26 http://5gtnf.fi/overview/
27 https://www.businessfinland.fi/en/for-finnish-customers/home
28 https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/161688/41_19_Leading%20the%20way%20into%20the%20age%20of%20artificial%20intelligence.pdf ; 83.
29 Ibid, 83

17

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

United Arab Emirates’
National AI Strategy
The UAE has been an early proponent of AI
adoption, having launched its vision for AI with
the appointment of a Minister of State for AI in
October 2017,30 the creation of a UAE Council for
AI in March 2018,31 and the official adoption of
a National AI Strategy in April 2019.32 The UAE’s
government views AI as a critical component for the
advancement of key sectors and to bolster overall
economic productivity.33 The government’s strategy
aims to establish and brand the country as a hub
for AI adoption, and become one of the leading
nations in AI by 2031.34 This strategy was supported
by the launch of the National Program for Artificial
Intelligence (BRAIN) which focuses on the UAE’s
objective to become a leader in responsible use of
35
AI, and the Think AI initiative which encourages
private companies to engage with the government
through a series of strategic roundtables to accelerate
the adoption of AI.36 The themes for the first five
roundtables focused on attracting and fostering
talent, enhancing the adoption of AI, regulation
and governance, preparing suitable infrastructure
and developing national standards.37

The UAE’s national strategy lays out a sectoral
approach with priority sectors identified to pilot AI
adoption.38 These priority sectors include resources
and energy, logistics and transport, tourism
and hospitality, healthcare and cybersecurity.39
Their strategy for building momentum for AI
development is to begin with existing strengths they
identify as industry assets and emerging sectors and
smart government before focusing on opportunities
where they hope to lead such as data sharing and
governance and developing a new generation of
regional talent.40 The UAE’s national strategy also
defines eight strategic objectives to help the country
move from an AI adopter to an AI innovator and
exporter, bringing together their foundational
priorities, activities and leadership vision as
illustrated in Figure 2.

30 https://u.ae/en/about-the-uae/strategies-initiatives-and-awards/federal-governments-strategies-and-plans/uae-strategy-for-artificial-intelligence
31 https://ai.gov.ae/uae-ai-initiatives/
32 https://uaecabinet.ae/en/details/news/uae-cabinet-adopts-national-artificial-intelligence-strategy-2031
33 https://u.ae/en/about-the-uae/strategies-initiatives-and-awards/federal-governments-strategies-and-plans/uae-strategy-for-artificial-intelligence
34 https://ai.gov.ae/wp-content/uploads/resources/UAE_National_Strategy_for_Artificial_Intelligence_2031.pdf
35 https://ai.gov.ae/about-us/
36 https://ai.gov.ae/the-uae-government-launches-think-ai-initiative/
37 Ibid
38 https://ai.gov.ae/wp-content/uploads/resources/UAE_National_Strategy_for_Artificial_Intelligence_2031.pdf
39 Ibid, 10.
40 Ibid, 10.

18

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

FIGURE 2: UAE National Strategy Objectives
VISION
To become one the leading nations in AI by 2031

BUILD A
REPUTATION AS
AN AI DESTINATION
Eg. UAI brand

LEADERSHIP
INCREASE THE
UAE COMPETITIVE
ASSETS IN PRIORITY
SECTORS THROUGH
DEPLOYMENT OF AI

DEVELOP A
FERTILE
ECOSYSTEM
FOR AI

ADOPT AI
ACROSS
GOVERNMENT
SERVICES TO
IMPROVE LIVES

Eg. Proof-of-concept
in priority sectors

Eg. Applied AI
accelerator

Eg. National AI
challenges

AI ACTIVITY
ATTRACT AND TRAIN
TALENT FOR FUTURE
JOBS ENABLED BY IA

Eg. Public AI
basic training

BRING WORLDLEADING RESEARCH
CAPABILITY TO WORK
WITH TARGET
INDUSTRIES

PROVIDE THE DATA
AND SUPPORTING
INFRASTRUCTURE
ESSENTIAL TO
BECOME A TEST BED
FOR AI

ENSURE
STRONG
GOVERNANCE
AND EFFECTIVE
REGULATION

Eg. Key thinkers
program

Eg. Secure data
infrastructure

Eg. Intergovernmental
panel on AI

FOUNDATIONS
Source: UAE National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (2018), p18.
https://ai.gov.ae/wp-content/uploads/resources/UAE_National_Strategy_for_Artificial_Intelligence_2031.pdf

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
19

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

The UAE has launched various programs to
support the underlying foundation for which AI
applications can be developed. A non-exhaustive list
of initiatives includes Smart Dubai, Dubai’s smart
city transformation initiative which proactively
engages in multi-stakeholder collaborations to codevelop AI applications,41 the UAE Strategy for the
Fourth Industrial Revolution, which focuses on AI
as well as industries where AI can have impact like
genomics and healthcare,42 and the Dubai Internet
of Things (IoT) Strategy, which aims to develop
an advanced IoT ecosystem that can support AIenabled IoT as it becomes available.43 To support
the development of these programs and initiatives
and the UAE’s goal of becoming a regional AI
hub, the government is also investing in acquiring
teams from other regions and incentivizing them to
develop in the UAE.44

Finally, the UAE’s AI strategy places significant
importance on PPP and multi-stakeholder
engagement. The AI Office is focusing on
several partnering initiatives with the private
sector. For example, they aim to launch an
‘applied AI accelerator’ to support domestic AI
entrepreneurship and product development in
the region.45 Their national strategy also notes how
existing funds for local innovators such as the
Mohammed bin Rashid Innovation Fund can be
used in collaboration with the AI Council to support
partnerships with government.46 Additionally, the
government is providing incentives to encourage
greater partnerships between the UAE and
multinational AI companies through facilitating
larger FDI schemes and AI-related investment
funds.47

41 https://www.smartdubai.ae/
42 https://government.ae/en/about-the-uae/strategies-initiatives-and-awards/federal-governments-strategies-and-plans/the-uae-strategy-for-the-fourth-industrial-revolution
43 https://www.government.ae/en/about-the-uae/strategies-initiatives-and-awards/local-governments-strategies-and-plans/dubai-internet-of-things-strategy
44 https://ai.gov.ae/wp-content/uploads/resources/UAE_National_Strategy_for_Artificial_Intelligence_2031.pdf ; 28.
45 Ibid, 27.
46 Ibid, 26.
47 Ibid, 28.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
20

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Comparing the Role of Government
in the Finnish and UAE National AI
strategies

In the decade before the National AI Strategy
was approved by the UAE Cabinet in 2019, the
UAE ranked behind only Turkey in the Middle
East and North Africa region in terms of total
AI investments. From 2008-2018 an aggregate of
$2.15 billion was spent on AI transactions in the
UAE through mergers, acquisitions and various
forms of investment (Microsoft & EY 2019). Direct
spending on AI systems – including AI software
applications and platforms – is predicted to reach
$73 million in 2020 (IDC 2019). PwC estimates that
AI will positively impact the UAE’s GDP by 13.6%
in 2030, although this represents forecasts based
on dynamic economic modeling carried out prior
to the onset of the coronavirus pandemic (PwC
2018b). While the effect of the pandemic remains
difficult to quantify, a 2020 survey of UAE business
leaders found 68% stating that AI – along with
automation and machine learning – will be even
more important for their companies in the postCovid era, and 40% responding more specifically
that it will facilitate further innovation (GE
Innovation Barometer 2020). Overall, a review of
the UAE’s national strategy illustrates a government
that is very active in driving AI development, and
focused on a sectoral approach.

This section synthesizes the findings from the
review of AI strategies in Finland and the UAE.
The heat maps shown in Figure 3 (Finland) and
Figure 4 (UAE) indicate the role of government
for initiatives in each category as either “directing,”
“enabling”, or having no initiative, reflecting
government approaches defined earlier in Box 2.
The assessment in these heat maps is based on a
broader review of the national strategies for these
countries included in the background paper of this
report, reflecting details that are not referenced in
the shorter summaries included in this working
paper. The authors acknowledge that some AI
policies and initiatives may not have been available
for consideration during the period of review
between 2019-2020, and that different conclusions
may be reached regarding the magnitude of
government interventions across the domains,
tools and instruments illustrated in the heat maps.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
21

FIGURE 3: Finland: Role of Government in AI Heat Map
TOOLS and INSTRUMENTS
AI POLICY DOMAINS

LEGAL AND
REGULATORY
REFORMS

EXPANSION OF
PUBLIC SERVICES
AND PROGRAMS

SOFT LAW, STANDARDS
AND INDUSTRY
SELF-REGULATION

MULTI-STAKEHOLDER
PARTNERSHIPS
AND PPPS

NEW CENTERS
AND FACILITATING
COLLABORATIONS

STRATEGIC
INVESTMENTS AND
DIRECT FUNDING

MULTI-STAKEHOLDER
PARTNERSHIPS
AND PPPS

NEW CENTERS
AND FACILITATING
COLLABORATIONS

STRATEGIC
INVESTMENTS AND
DIRECT FUNDING

SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
AI TALENT
DEVELOPMENT
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ECOSYSTEM
ETHICAL AI
STANDARDS
DATA
ACCESS
AI IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR
SECTORAL
ADOPTION OF AI
BUILDING CAPABILITIES
FOR GOVERNING AI

FIGURE 4: UAE: Role of Government in AI Heat Map
TOOLS and INSTRUMENTS
AI POLICY DOMAINS

LEGAL AND
REGULATORY
REFORMS

EXPANSION OF
PUBLIC SERVICES
AND PROGRAMS

SOFT LAW, STANDARDS
AND INDUSTRY
SELF-REGULATION

SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
AI TALENT
DEVELOPMENT
ENTREPRENEURSHIP
ECOSYSTEM
ETHICAL AI
STANDARDS
DATA
ACCESS
AI IN THE PUBLIC
SECTOR
SECTORAL
ADOPTION OF AI
BUILDING CAPABILITIES
FOR GOVERNING AI

KEY:

DIRECTING

ENABLING

NO INITIATIVE
22

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

The governments of both Finland and the UAE
have demonstrated active roles in developing and
executing AI policies and initiatives. Four areas of
flagship policies emerge in Finland’s AI strategy
including supporting scientific research and
developing AI talent, supporting entrepreneurial
ecosystems for AI, enhancing data access and
establishing ethical data and algorithm governance
guidance through collaboration with stakeholders,
and finally a focus on developing AI for public
service delivery. Similarly, the UAE government’s
approach to AI adoption also focuses on the
expansion of AI in public service, developing local
scientific research capabilities, and developing AI
training programs for students and government
employees through public-private partnerships. The
UAE strategy has limited reference to regulatory or

hard law approaches for managing AI development
across any of the key policy domains, though it has
indicated committing to ethical standards through
frameworks and toolkits, and providing strategic
investments and partnerships to advance adoption
of AI within targeted sectors. Both governments
also place high strategic importance on engaging
multi-stakeholder collaborations to facilitate
AI. However, while the UAE has taken a hybrid
approach with more top-down directed initiatives
to accelerate the development of an AI ecosystem,
Finland has instead exhibited a mostly bottom-up
approach. Other key differences include the greater
focus the UAE has had on acquiring AI talent
from abroad, as well as their more emphatic role in
directing sectoral adoption of AI.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
23

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

NATIONAL AI STRATEGIES ACROSS THE DEVELOPING WORLD
This section presents a summary of findings
from a review of AI strategies in Asia, Africa and
South America to yield greater insight into how

governments are approaching AI in a mix of nine
emerging markets and developing countries.

Asia: India and China

Strategy on Artificial Intelligence’ outlines a
comprehensive approach, including key sectors
for intervention and crosscutting themes such as
data storage and privacy as national priority (NITI
Aayog 2018). The Chinese strategy also targets
key sectors along with numerous other initiatives
aimed at leading in AI research and technology
globally. China’s plan to become a world leader
in AI by 2030 outlines comprehensive measures
including directly funding start-ups, selecting
national champions and limiting foreign companies
in domestic markets (Ding 2018).

While both India and China exhibit global
leadership in developing comprehensive national
AI strategies, China’s AI ecosystem is more mature,
and its government has committed a greater
number of resources towards it. Both governments
take charge in defining priorities and designing
their AI strategies. The Indian federal government’s
NITI Aayog think tank is tasked with designing
its national strategy,48 and the resulting ‘National

Both India and China’s AI strategies are also
defined by the central government in a top-down
approach, while relying on local governments to
execute strategies. Decision-making power rests
in the hands of central government to design and
develop the targets and policies of the AI strategy.
Compared to India, China’s policies more frequently
reflect a directing role of government, such as direct

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment

48 Expert interview with member of NITI Aayog on May 9, 2019.

24

funding for start-up accelerators, scholarships for
AI graduate students, establishment of national AI
research centers or innovation hubs, and financing
rewards and “grand challenges.”

Aayog in India has sought numerous stakeholder
consultations in designing India’s AI strategy.
NITI Aayog has also designed recommendations
for India’s strategy and sectoral applications
based on wide consultation with technical and
sectoral AI experts and academics.50 In contrast,
there is less evidence of stakeholder consultation
in China’s strategy development. Both countries
rely on cooperation with the private sector to

To accelerate AI adoption, both India and China
adopt a mix of policies aimed at both establishing
digital foundations that can enable AI ecosystems,
as well as directly supporting AI development. Both
use strategies across domain areas including skills
development, investment in scientific research
and data access. For example, China’s strategy
supports new AI academic degrees, new public
national datasets and cloud service platforms,
and the development of hardware to support AI
research, including supercomputing facilities,
funding for quantum computing and encouraging
national champions to acquire chip technologies by
signing deals with international firms (Ding 2018).
India’s strategy applies AI in target development
sectors, such as applying computer vision for
traffic management or natural language processing
(NLP) to reduce language barriers and improve
interoperability across states, while at the same
time investing directly in AI talent and skills
development, data access and governance and
ethical frameworks.49

implement AI in sectoral applications. India’s
strategy outlines that, while the government is
responsible for providing an enabling environment
and infrastructure, the private sector must lead
the implementation and adoption in use cases.
The Chinese government encourages cooperation
between the public and private sectors, especially
in terms of sharing data between the government
and companies. Furthermore, since 2018, China’s
government has been publicly encouraging several
51
domestic “AI Champions.”

The strategies of both countries focus on enabling
technological development. China’s approach to AI
applications has been characterized as “experiment
first and regulate later,” yielding rapid innovation
and implementation, especially in healthcare (Nesta
2020, p3). In terms of stakeholder engagement,
China has less involvement from stakeholders
outside central government, whereas NITI

49 Expert interview with member of NITI Aayog, May 9, 2019.
50 Expert interview with member of NITI Aayog, May 9, 2019.
51 Baidu’s focus will be on autonomous driving; the cloud computing division of Alibaba is tasked with a project called “city brains,” a set of AI solutions to

improve urban life, including smart transport; Tencent will focus on computer vision for medical diagnosis; while Shenzhen-listed iFlytek, a dominant
player in voice recognition, will specialize in voice intelligence. See Ding 2018.

25

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Africa: Egypt, Ghana,
Kenya and South Africa
The four African country cases reviewed exhibit
a nascent level of maturity concerning their AI
strategies and ecosystems. Human development
indicators are relatively low, setting the context for
multi-stakeholder engagement and a bottom-up
approach, particularly in skills training, with the
private sector and nonprofit organizations as key
stakeholders. Across the four countries, there are
a range of initiatives to address AI. For example,
Kenya’s “Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence
Taskforce” aims to prioritize the development and
implementation of AI and blockchain with the
goal of supporting the government in leveraging
and harnessing new technologies (Dutton et al.
2018). In Egypt, the Minister of ICT has recently
announced a national AI strategy with four pillars
including rapid adoption of AI in the government
to increase efficiency and transparency; applying
AI in key development sectors; capacity building
and academic advances to boost innovation; and
prioritizing digital cooperation in the region and
globally.52 While Ghana does not have a national
AI strategy, the president has proposed a national
strategy umbrella for science, technology and

innovation (STI) with a holistic approach to
development.53 South Africa is leading the continent
in AI adoption with a strong start-up ecosystem
predominantly driven by the private sector (Gadzala
2018).
Initiatives for AI adoption led by various stakeholders
in the four countries exhibit a combination of both
top-down and bottom-up strategies. The top-down
approach is particularly observed in governments’
aspirations to invest in hubs and education
programs. In Egypt for example, the government

52 Egypt’s national AI strategy is available at https://stip.oecd.org/stip/policy-initiatives/2019%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F26476
53 The seven pillars address the coordination of all sectors involving STI, the private-public partnerships (PPPs), the R&D funding, the STEM education,

required legislation as well as the implementation of AI across key sectors of the economy. See Government of Ghana. n.d. “Gov’t using science, technology
for national development.”

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
26

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

put forward multiple initiatives publicly advocated
by the president (Ahram Online 2020). In Ghana,
the government is also investing in innovation by
launching a $10 million initiative called the National
54
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Plan (NEIP).
From a bottom-up approach, the government
encourages private associations to create hubs and
conferences for AI skills at the local level. In South
Africa, private associations have been organizing
conferences to teach deep learning and AI locally,
such as the Deep Learning Indaba conference
(Snow 2019).
Finally, some of these countries have demonstrated
constraining policies to mitigate the risks of AI,
with a particular focus on data protection. In Kenya
the Open Data portal makes public government

54 http://neip.gov.gh/page/2/
55 http://www.opendata.go.ke/

27

datasets accessible for free in the context of a data
protection law.55 In Ghana the STI’s policy pillars
include start-up incubation centers and a National
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Plan that falls
under Ghana’s 2012 Data Protection Act, which
regulates how personal information is acquired,
stored and disclosed. Similarly, Egypt has adopted
the Personal Data Protection Law (Law No. 151
of 2020) which aims to protect and regulate the
collection and processing of personal data of Egypt’s
citizens and residents. Overall, while the four
African countries reviewed in this report do not
have a single comprehensive and focused national
AI strategy as seen in Finland and the UAE, they
nonetheless exhibit a number of related initiatives
to drive AI.

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Latin America and Central Asia:
Argentina, Brazil and Kazakhstan
Argentina, Brazil and Kazakhstan represent
countries at various stages in national AI strategy
development. Argentina published an AI strategy
document in 2019 called Plan ArgenIA (though
not yet approved by resolution).56 In late 2019
Brazil announced a round of public consultations
to request feedback on their proposed national AI
strategy. 57 Kazakhstan did not have a national AI
strategy at the time of review. All three countries
exhibit early-stage innovation ecosystems.
Argentina’s AI strategy highlights the use of AI
for economic development (linked to SDGs) and
R&D, while also calling attention to the importance
of inclusiveness, sustainability and privacy. In
Brazil, eight AI laboratories were created by the
government to focus on priority application areas,
including IoT, cybersecurity and AI in public
administration.58 Kazakhstan includes AI and digital
development as part of its national 2050 Vision
Modernization 3.0, through which the government
is prioritizing the acceleration of technological
modernization of the economy (Nos 2017). In
Brazil, the government is adopting a more granular
approach to digitalization at the industry level, with
priority offered to health care, agriculture and smart
cities (Mari 2017), while at the same time setting

56
57
58
59

up partnerships and goals to create an advanced AI
center (Felipe 2019). As with other case countries
at the “nascent” level of AI ecosystem maturity,
AI initiatives in Argentina, Brazil and Kazakhstan
more often prioritize enabling policies over
constraining ones.
All three countries’ governments exhibit a mix of
top-down and bottom-up approaches to progress
either digital or AI strategies (where they
exist). Through collaboration with universities,
governments support AI-specific laboratories,
and Master’s degree and PhD programs and
59
fellowships. Kazakhstan’s government has invested
in accelerating inclusion and innovation with their
Technology Forum and the Start-Up Kazakhstan
Tech Garden, and has also invested nearly $47

https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=f9412c52-8d18-49ee-805e-4b7c3d66ab1d
For details of contributions received, see Brazil’s public contributions website: http://participa.br/profile/estrategia-brasileira-de-inteligencia-artificial
https://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/en/geral/noticia/2019-11/brazil-unveils-eight-new-ai-labs
For example, Argentinian doctoral programs, the Graduate Program in Information Systems and Artificial Intelligence at the University of Sao Paulo
(http://ppgsi.each.usp.br/artificial-intelligence/?lang=en), or the Nazarbayev University research labs in Advanced Robotics and Mechatronic Systems
(https://nu.edu.kz/research/laboratories).

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
28

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

million in grants and loans to support more than
600 start-up projects under the national 2030
Vision (Egusa 2019). Brazil’s National AI Strategy
was launched with a round of public consultations
in December 2019, and a small but growing AI
start-up ecosystem is developing in private sector
markets, supported by government-funded AI
laboratories.60 In both Brazil and Kazakhstan,
academia and nonprofit organizations support
local AI development.

adoption in key sectors is led by ministries and can
include partnerships with technology companies.
Argentina’s strategy engages the public and private
sectors, third sector (nonprofit organizations, civil
society, and nongovernmental organizations), the
scientific and technology sector and international
organizations to provide input. It also includes
efforts to develop PPPs for supercomputing
capabilities (Presidencia de la Nation 2018).
Regarding multi-stakeholder engagement, the
Brazilian Association of Artificial Intelligence
helps in upskilling the labor force and promoting
the exchange of information between national and
international companies (Yamamoto 2017).

Partnerships and multi-stakeholder engagement to
drive AI adoption has been observed in all three
of these countries that are characterized by nascent
AI innovation ecosystems. In Kazakhstan, AI

60 http://thefuturesociety.org/2020/03/17/unesco-regional-forum-on-ai-in-latin-america-and-the-caribbean/

29

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Overview of AI Flagship Initiatives Observed
As observed across the eleven countries reviewed,
the AI policymaking landscape has a wide range
of policy and regulatory approaches. Some
governments focus on regulation, policy reform,
soft law and multi-stakeholder partnerships to
create an “enabling” environment for AI adoption,

as in the case of Finland. Other countries opt for
a more “directing” approach centered on strategic
investments, direct funding and establishing new
centers, such as in the UAE. The analysis of the
country cases has also identified some common
flagship initiatives which are summarized in Box 2.

BOX 2: Overview of Common AI Flagship Initiatives Observed

• Supporting the development of AI innovation clusters and hubs including collaboration between
government, academia and the private sector;
• Investing continuously in research capability including computing, data and algorithmic infrastructure
starting from practical applications and moving towards fundamental research;
• Injecting direct financial investment in start-ups to compensate for gaps in venture capital funding;
• Developing AI talent via multiple pillars including digital skills and STEM education, funding for new
AI academic and graduate programs, and foreign talent attraction and retention measures;
• Establishing a comprehensive data and algorithm governance framework enabling access to the
flow of high-quality data, while ensuring fair, accountable, explainable, privacy-enhancing and
secure processing;
• Targeting key sectors for AI adoption for economic growth and human development; and
• Adopting AI to improve public service delivery and resource efficiency while building capability
and expertise.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
30

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

As observed, “transitioning” countries – those
with an established baseline digital economy and
that are evolving towards universal Internet usage
such as India and China tend to address several
domain areas to accelerate their AI adoption.
These domains include encouraging the growth of
scientific research, building digital infrastructure,
starting to address ethical questions, exploring AI
in government applications, and working closely
with start-ups for AI adoption. Also, countries at the
intersection of “transitioning” and “transforming”
digital economies – those with a relatively stable
and widespread base of digital technology – provide
examples of emerging practices for harnessing AI.
These governments support both hardware and
software developments and create new research
centers in collaboration with both universities and
the private sector. Moreover, they can build an

assessment of AI impact on their local economies
and adequately reform national education to assure
digital skills and STEM education at large, as well
as upskilling the public administration. Some case
countries also prioritize national champions for
key sectors and collaborate with the private sector
to create new platforms for data sharing.
More in-depth exploration is required on the role
of government in countries with less developed
innovation ecosystems and digital foundations. In
these countries with nascent innovation ecosystems
and weaker digital economy foundations such
as Kenya, Ghana, Egypt and South Africa,
governments have reduced capability, capacity
and resources to drive AI at a national level. As
such, in practice the ability of governments may be
impeded.

FUTURE RESEARCH
As policy and regulatory pathways for harnessing AI
are still in their infancy, further time and research
is needed to assess the outputs of these strategies,
and their effectiveness in order to identify best
practices for developing countries. Rather than
concluding with best practices, this article provides
an initial review of policy and regulatory practices
currently deployed in AI policymaking, illustrating
a wide range of tools and approaches that
governments have taken in their attempt to harness
AI technologies while mitigating anticipated risks.
While many of the policies observed have been

in effect for a few years, more time, evidence and
analysis is needed to measure and determine their
effectiveness based on targeted outcomes.
An additional focus of further research should be
to understand how to accelerate AI adoption in
developing countries while implementing the right
safeguards to ensure trust in the digital era within
these national contexts. More research is needed to
build consensus around best practices, particularly
around how to effectively operationalize policies
that are articulated in this report. A comprehensive

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
31

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

country AI readiness assessment framework
and maturity assessment could help to analyze
countries’ implementation of possible roadmaps for
development. In addition to focusing on countries’
adoption of AI, additional analysis is needed in this
evolving AI ecosystem to understand the economic
impact of AI, and the extent to which AI strategies
are achieving intended development outcomes
within developing countries. This analysis should
include the economic impact across different
vertical sectors that rank high within development
country agendas. And while previous studies have
explored sectoral applications of AI in emerging
markets (Strusani & Houngbonon 2019; IFC 2020),
further research is needed with a narrower focus

on sectoral applications in countries at the lower
end of the income scale. In terms of policy and
regulation, future research is needed to address a)
the mix of policy instruments such as legislation,
technical interventions and standards, and industry
guidelines; b) the additional range of potential risks
to be addressed including data security, privacy,
transparency, safety and data bias; c) scenarios
to predict, preempt or mitigate unforeseen
consequences and negative externalities, including
rising unemployment, social and economic
inequality; and finally d) legal and judicial systems
to address new legal questions such as liability for
autonomous systems and privacy concerns related
to the processing or storing of personal data.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
32

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This working paper is based on a background
report prepared by a team led by the World
Bank in collaboration with The Future Society.
The core World Bank team consisted of Zaki B.
Khoury (Senior Digital Development Specialist,
Digital Development) and Audrey Ariss (Digital
Development Specialist, Digital Development)
for the background report and Rami Amin
(Consultant, Digital Development) for the
development of this working paper. Previous World
Bank colleagues from the Digital Development
Global Practice also contributed to this work
including Aki Ilari Enkenberg and Jane Treadwell.
The Future Society team included Nicolas Miailhe
(Founder and President); Yolanda Lannquist (Head
of Research and Advisory); Arohi Jain Rajvanshi
(Senior AI Policy Researcher); R. Buse Çetin (AI
Policy Researcher); and Adriana Bora (AI Policy
Researcher). Colin Blackman was the principal
editor of the background report that informed this
working paper. The team is also grateful to William
Ursenbach (Senior External Affairs Assistant,
External and Corporate Relations) for the layout
and graphical design of this working paper, and
to Kay Kim (Consultant, Digital Development)
for copyediting the final draft. The work was
conducted under the general guidance of Mark
Williams (Practice Manager, Digital Development)
as well as Isabel Neto (Practice Manager, Digital
Development), Michel Rogy (Practice Manager,
Digital Development), and Nicole Klingen (Practice
Manager, Digital Development). The team is also
grateful for the support provided by Boutheina
Guermazi (Director, Digital Development).

Specialist, Digital Development); Tim Kelly
(Lead Digital Development Specialist, Digital
Development); Khuram Farooq (Senior Financial
Management Specialist, Governance); and
Rowena M. Gorospe (Senior Counsel, Institutional
Administration). The team was also fortunate to
receive advice and guidance at various points in
the report preparation process from David Satola
(Lead Counsel, Legal-Operations); Samia Melhem
(Lead Digital Development Specialist, Digital
Development); Stela Mocan (Lead IT Officer,
Technology and Innovation); Astrid Jacobsen
(Senior Digital Development Specialist, Digital
Development); Craig Hammer (Program Manager,
DEC Strategy and Resources); Kimberly D. Johns
(Senior Public Sector Specialist, Governance);
Hunt La Cascia (Senior Procurement Specialist,
Governance); Oleg V. Petrov (Senior Digital
Development Specialist, Digital Development);
Oualid Bachiri (Digital Development Specialist,
Digital Development); Roumeen Islam (Economic
Advisor, Infrastructure) and Tania Priscilla Begazo
Gomez (Senior Economist, Digital Development).
The team is also grateful for comments received for
the working paper from Hoon Sahib Soh, Special
Representative in the World Bank Group Korea
Office, and Yoon-Seok Ko, Vice President of Data
and AI at the National Information Society Agency
(NIA) in Korea.
This work received financial support from the
Digital Development Partnership (DDP) and
its Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). The team
acknowledges support received from Bertram
Boie (Senior Economist, Digital Development)
and Christine Howard (Program Assistant,
Digital Development) for their coordination, and
are thankful for the support from DDP member
countries and organizations.

The team is grateful for peer review comments
received from World Bank colleagues during the
Decision Meeting review for the background
report from Sajitha Bashir (Advisor, Education);
Juan Navas-Sabater (Lead Digital Development
33

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

REFERENCES
Abishev, Olzhas, and Yerbol Spatayev. 2019. The Future Development of Digital Health in Kazakhstan. Eurohealth 25 (2): 24-28.
Ahram Online. 2020. “Egypt’s Sisi orders applying AI technology in construction projects.” Ahram Online, October 25.
https://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/389166/Egypt/Politics-/Egypts-Sisi-orders-applying-AI-technology-in-const.aspx
AI-HLEG (High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence). 2019. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI.
Brussels: European Commission.
Allen, Robbie. 2018. “ICML 2018 Accepted Papers Stats.” Medium: Machine Learning in Practice, July 9.
https://medium.com/machine-learning-in-practice/icml-2018-accepted-papers-stats-339f1cad5a55
Arab Republic of Egypt. 2019. “During Meeting with AmCham Members, ICT Minister Announces Preparation of Egypt AI strategy.”
Press Release, January 20. http://www.mcit.gov.eg/Media_Center/Press_Room/Press_Releases/28084
Arabian Business. 2018. “UAE Adopts New National AI Strategy Aimed at Becoming Global Leader.” Arabian Business, April 22.
https://www.arabianbusiness.com/technology/418254-uae-adopts-new-national-ai-strategy-aimed-at-becoming-global-leader
Arshadi, A. K. and others. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence for Covid-19 Drug Discovery and Vaccine Development.”
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 18.
https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2020.00065
Astana Times. 2019. “Microsoft Kazakhstan to Assist Domestic Companies Integrate AI Technology.” The Astana Times, March 18.
https://astanatimes.com/2019/03/microsoft-kazakhstan-to-assist-domestic-companies-integrate-ai-technology/
AU-EU Digital Economy Task Force (AU-EU DETF). 2019. New Africa-Europe Digital Economy Partnership: Accelerating the Achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/new-africa-europe-digital-economy-partnership-report-eu-au-digital-economy-task-force
Avasant. 2019. Applied AI and Advanced Analytics Services 2019.
https://avasant.com/report/applied-ai-and-analytics-services-2019-radarview/
BAAI (Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence). 2019. “Beijing AI Principles.”
https://www.baai.ac.cn/news/beijing-ai-principles-en.html?fbclid=IwAR2HtIRKJxxy9Q1Y953H-2pMHl_bIr8pcsIxho93BtZY-FPH39vV9v9B2eY
Baker, Liana B. 2017. “Trump Bars Chinese-Backed Firm from Buying U.S. Chipmaker Lattice.” Reuters, September 13.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-lattice-m-a-canyonbridge-trump/trump-bars-chinese-backed-firm-from-buying-u-s-chipmaker-latticeidUSKCN1BO2ME
Banga, Karishma and Dirk Willem te Velde. 2018 Digitalization and the Future of Manufacturing in Africa. London: Supporting Economic
Transformation. https://set.odi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/SET_Digitalisation-and-future-of-African-manufacturing_Final.pdf
Barton, D., J. Woetzel, J. Seong, Q. Tian. 2017. Artificial Intelligence: Implications for China. McKinsey Global Institute.
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/china/artificial-intelligence-implications-for-china

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
34

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Beridze, I. 2018. “Mitigating the Effects of AI on Inequality and Crime in Developing Countries and Emerging Markets.” Paper presented at
the conference “AI for Good,” Center for Artificial Intelligence & Robotics, UNICRI, Geneva, May 2018.
BNamericas. 2018. “Brazil Launches Digital Transformation Strategy.” BNamericas, March 22.
https://www.bnamericas.com/en/news/brazil-launches-digital-transformation-strategy
Briter Bridges. 2019. Adopting Artificial Intelligence in Africa. Report prepared in collaboration with Alliance 4 AI.
https://briterbridges.com/innovation-maps
Brundage, M. and others. 2018. Malicious Use of Artificial Intelligence: Forecasting, Prevention and Mitigation.
Oxford: Future of Humanity Institute.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1802.07228.pdf
Brynjolfsson, E., and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies.
New York: W.W. Norton.
Brynjolfsson, E., T. Mitchell, and D. Rock. 2018. “What Can Machines Learn, and What Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy?”
AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 43-47.
Bughin, J., J. Seong, J. Manyika, M. Chui, and R. Joshi. 2018. Notes from the AI Frontier: Modeling the Impact of AI on the World Economy.
McKinsey Global Institute.
Bughin, J. and J. Woetzel. 2019. Navigating a World of Disruption. McKinsey Global Institute.
C MINDS. 2018. Towards an AI Strategy in Mexico: Harnessing the AI Revolution.
https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/7be025_e726c582191c49d2b8b6517a590151f6.pdf
Campbell, Thomas A. 2019. Artificial Intelligence: An Overview of State Initiatives. Future Grasp.
https://www.futuregrasp.com/artificial-intelligence-an-overview-of-state-initiatives
Capgemini and Digital Transformation Institute. 2017. Turning AI into concrete value: the successful implementers’ toolkit.
CB Insights. 2019. “China is Starting to Edge Out the US in AI Investment.” CB Insights Research Briefs,
https://www.cbinsights.com/research/china-artificial-intelligence-investment-startups-tech/
Chang, Jae-Hee, and Phu Huynh. 2016. ASEAN in Transformation: The Future of Jobs at Risk of Automation.
Geneva: International Labour Organization (ILO).
https://www.ilo.org/actemp/publications/WCMS_579554/lang--en/index.htm
Chen, James. 2019. “Abu Dhabi Investment Council (ADIC).” Investopedia, April 8.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/abu-dhabi-investment-council.asp
China State Council. 2017. “A Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan.”
(G. Webster, R. Creemers, P. Triolo, and E. Kania, Trans.). Stanford-New America DigiChina Project. State Council.
https://www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/full-translation-chinas-new-generation-artificial-intelligence-development-plan-2017/

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
35

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 3

Chui, M., M. Harryson, J. Manyika, R. Roberts, R. Chung, A. Heteren, and P. Nel. 2018a.
Notes from the AI Frontier: Applying AI for Social Good. Discussion Paper. McKinsey Global Institute.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Featured%20Insights/Artificial%20Intelligence/Applying%20artificial%20intelligence%20
for%20social%20good/MGI-Applying-AI-for-social-good-Discussion-paper-Dec-2018.ashx
Chui, Michael, James Manyika, Mehdi Miremadi, Nicolaus Henke, Rita Chung, Pieter Nel, and Sankalp Malhotra. 2018b.
Notes from the AI Frontier: Insights from Hundreds of Use Cases. Discussion Paper. McKinsey Global Institute.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/featured%20insights/artificial%20intelligence/notes%20from%20the%20ai%20frontier%20
applications%20and%20value%20of%20deep%20learning/notes-from-the-ai-frontier-insights-from-hundreds-of-use-cases-discussion-paper.ashx
Cisse, M. 2018. “Look to Africa to Advance Artificial Intelligence.” Nature 562 (7728): 461-461. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-018-07104-7.
Conseil régional d’Île-de-France. 2018. “Un plan pour faire L’Ile-de-France 1er region europeenne en intelligence artificielle,”
https://www.iledefrance.fr/un-plan-pour-faire-de-lile-de-france-la-1re-region-europeenne-en-intelligence-artificielle
Cremer, J., Y-A. de Montjoye, and H. Schweizer. 2019. Competition Policy for the Digital Era. Brussels: European Commission.
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf
Cussins Newman, Jessica. 2020. Decision Points in AI Governance: Three Case Studies Explore Efforts to Operationalize AI Principles. UC
Berkeley Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity. https://cltc.berkeley.edu/ai-decision-points/
Dean, Jeff and Moustapha Cisse. 2018. “Google AI in Ghana.” Google Africa Blog, June 13.
https://africa.googleblog.com/2018/06/google-ai-in-ghana.html
Deloitte. 2019. Global artificial intelligence industry whitepaper.
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/technology-media-telecommunications/deloitte-cn-tmt-ai-reporten-190927.pdf
Dernis, H., P. Gkotsis, N. Grassano, S. Nakazato, M. Squicciarini, B. Van Beuzekom, and A. Vezzani. 2019. World Corporate Top R&D
investors: Shaping the Future of Technologies and of AI. EUR 29831 EN, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union,
doi:10.2760/472704
Dias, Y., Calicchio, N. and J. Lombardi. 2019. Brazil Digital Report – 1st edition. McKinsey & Company.
https://www.mckinsey.com/br/our-insights/blog-made-in-brazil/brazil-digital-report
Ding, Jeffrey. 2018 Deciphering China’s AI Dream: The Context, Components, Capabilities, and Consequences of China’s Strategy to Lead
the World in AI. Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford University.
https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Deciphering_Chinas_AI-Dream.pdf
Ding, Jeffrey. 2019. “China’s AI “National Team”.” ChinaAI Newsletter #51.
https://chinai.substack.com/p/chinai-51-chinas-ai-national-team
Dubai Advantage. 2018. Artificial Intelligence: Investment Opportunity Brief.
https://thedubaiadvantage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Artifical_Intelligence_InvestmentOpportunityBrief.pdf
Dutton, T., Barron, B., and Boskovic, G. 2018. Building an AI World: Report on National and Regional AI Strategies. Toronto: CIFAR.
https://www.cifar.ca/docs/default-source/ai-society/buildinganaiworld_eng.pdf

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
36

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Dutton, T. 2018. “An Overview of National AI Strategies.” Medium: Politics + AI, June 28.
https://medium.com/politics-ai/an-overview-of-national-ai-strategies-2a70ec6edfd
Economou, Nicolas. 2017. “The New Normal: A ‘Principled’ Artificial Intelligence Could Improve Justice.” ABA Journal, October 3.
https://www.abajournal.com/legalrebels/article/a_principled_artificial_intelligence_could_improve_justice
Edwards, Caryn. 2018, “The Development of AI in South Africa.” The South African, November 20.
https://www.thesouthafrican.com/the-development-of-ai-in-south-africa/
Egusa, C. 2019. “An entrepreneurs guide to Qazaqstan’s startup scene.” Podium, March 26.
https://thenextweb.com/podium/2019/03/26/an-entrepreneurs-guide-to-qazaqstans-startup-scene/
Element AI and Nesta. 2019. Data Trusts: A New Tool for Data Governance.
https://hello.elementai.com/rs/024-OAQ-547/images/Data_Trusts_EN_201914.pdf
Ehimuan-Chiazor, Juliet. 2017. “Making the Internet Work Better for Everyone in Africa.” Google Africa Blog, July 27.
https://africa.googleblog.com/2017/07/making-internet-work-better-for.html
Eurasian Economic Commission. 2018. “Eurasian Integration Sets Out on a Path of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.”
Eurasian Economic Commission, September 21.
http://www.eurasiancommission.org/en/nae/news/Pages/21-09-2018-5.aspx
European Commission. 2020. White Paper on Artificial Intelligence: A European approach to excellence and trust.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/commission-white-paper-artificial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf
FCAI. 2020. “Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence and NVIDIA to establish a joint NVIDIA AI Technology Center.”
Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence, May 25.
https://fcai.fi/news/2020/5/25/finnish-center-for-artificial-intelligence-and-nvidia-to-establish-a-joint-nvidia-ai-technology-center
Feldstein, S. 2019. “The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 17.
https://carnegieendowment.org/2019/09/17/global-expansion-of-ai-surveillance-pub-79847
Felipe, Luis. 2019. “IBM to Create Brazil’s “Most Advanced” Artificial Intelligence Centre.” PortugaliNews, February 12.
https://portugalinews.eu/ibm-to-create-brazils-most-advanced-artificial-intelligence-centre/
Fjeld, Jessica and Achten, Nele and Hilligoss, Hannah and Nagy, Adam and Srikumar, Madhulika. 2020.
“Principled Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical and Rights-Based Approaches to Principles for AI”
Berkman Klein Center Research Publication No. 2020-1
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3518482 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3518482
Fleming, Sean. 2018. “In Rwanda, High-Speed Drones are Delivering Blood to Remote Communities.” World Economic Forum.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/12/in-rwanda-drones-are-delivering-blood-to-remote-communities/
Floridi, Luciano, and others. 2018. “AI4People—An Ethical Framework for a Good AI Society: Opportunities, Risks, Principles, and Recommendations.” Minds & Machines 28 (4): 689–707.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
37

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Foley, Paul, and others. 2020. International Digital Economy and Society Index 2020. The
European Commission, Directorate-General of Communications Networks, Content and Technology.
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/digital-economy-and-society-index-desi
Freeman, Katherine. 2016. “Algorithmic Injustice: How the Wisconsin Supreme Court Failed to Protect Due Process Rights
in State v. Loomis.” North Carolina Journal of Law and Technology 18 (5): 75-106.
https://scholarship.law.unc.edu/ncjolt/vol18/iss5/3
Friedman, B., and H. Nissenbaum. 1996. “Bias in Computer Systems”. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 14 (3): 330–347.
Fundação Alexandre de Gusmão (FUNAG). 2017. Internet of Things: An Action Plan for Brazil, by Filipe G. Martins and Claudio Leal,
special adviser to the President of the Republic.”
http://www.funag.gov.br/images/2017/Novembro/Dialogos/Claudio_Leal-Internet-of-Things.pdf
Furman, J. 2019. Unlocking Digital Competition: Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785547/unlocking_digital_competition_
furman_review_web.pdf
Future of Life Institute. 2018. “State of California endorses Asilomar AI Principles,” https://futureoflife.org/2018/08/31/state-of-california-endorses-asilomar-ai-principles/
Gadzala, A. 2018. Coming to Life: Artificial Intelligence in Africa. Washington, DC: Atlantic Council.
https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Coming-to-Life-Artificial-Intelligence-in-Africa.pdf
Gagne, J.F. and others. 2020. Global AI Talent Pool Report 2020.
https://jfgagne.ai/global-ai-talent-report-2020/
Gallegos, Doyle, Junko Narimatsu, Oana Ariana Batori, Janet Hernandez, Daniel Leza, Ivan Skenderoski, and Erik Whitlock. 2018. Innovative Business Models for Expanding Fiber-Optic Networks and Closing the Access Gaps. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/674601544534500678/Main-Report
Gaskell, A. 2020. “Talent in the age of AI.” Forbes, January 22.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/adigaskell/2020/01/22/talent-in-the-age-of-ai/
Gatti, Roberta V., and others. 2018. The Human Capital Project. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/363661540826242921/The-Human-Capital-Project
GE Innovation Barometer. 2020. “UAE Grows Its Reputation for Innovation – 2020 GE Global Innovation Barometer.”
General Electric, December 16.
https://www.ge.com/news/reports/uae-grows-its-reputation-for-innovation-2020-ge-global-innovation-barometer
Goldfarb, A. and D. Trefler. 2018. AI and International Trade. NBER Working Paper 24254.
Hawkins, Amy. 2018. “Beijing’s Big Brother Tech Needs African Faces.” Foreign Policy, July 24.
https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/07/24/beijings-big-brother-tech-needs-african-faces/
Heinrich, M. 2019. “Heinrich, Portman, Schatz Propose National Strategy For Artificial Intelligence; Call For $2.2 Billion Investment In
Education, Research & Development.” Press Release, May 21.
https://www.heinrich.senate.gov/press-releases/heinrich-portman-schatz-propose-national-strategy-for-artificial-intelligence-call-for-22-billion-investment-in-education-research-and-development

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
38

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

HM Government. 2018. Industrial Strategy: Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/702810/180425_BEIS_AI_Sector_
Deal__4_.pdf
Holon IQ. 2020. The Global AI Strategy Landscape.
https://www.holoniq.com/notes/the-global-ai-strategy-landscape/
IDC (International Data Corporation). 2019. “Spending on Artificial Intelligence Systems in the Middle East & Africa to Top $374 Million in
2020.” IDC Media Center, September 30.
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prMETA45546719
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2020. Artificial Intelligence in Emerging Markets: Opportunities, Trends, and Emerging Business
Models. Washington, D.C.: International Finance Corporation.
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/publications_ext_content/ifc_external_publication_site/publications_listing_page/artificial+intelligence+in+emerging+markets
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2018. The Economics of artificial intelligence: Implications for the future of work. Geneva: ILO.
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---cabinet/documents/publication/wcms_647306.pdf
INSEAD.2020. The Global Talent in the Age of Artificial Intelligence: The Global Talent Competitiveness Index 2020. Paris: INSEAD.
https://gtcistudy.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/GTCI-2020-Report.pdf
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2018. Accessing the Economic Impact of Artificial Intelligence.
https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/opb/gen/S-GEN-ISSUEPAPER-2018-1-PDF-E.pdf
Jackson, T. 2017. “SA’s hearX Group Crowdfunding Campaign Oversubscribed.” Disrupt Africa, August 9.
http://disrupt-africa.com/2017/08/sas-hearx-group-crowdfunding-campaign-oversubscribed/
Kahn, J. and J. Vanian. 2021. “How A.I. can speed up the COVID-19 vaccination drive.” Fortune, January 5.
https://fortune.com/2021/01/05/a-i-covid-19-vaccination-drive/
Kamel, Nevine. 2019. “Communications Ministry Explores Increasing Egyptian Technology Exports at MWC 2019.”
The Daily News Egypt, February 26.
https://dailynewssegypt.com/2019/02/26/communications-ministry-explores-increasing-egyptian-technology-exports-at-mwc-2019/
Kania, Elsa B. 2017. “Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission: Chinese Advances in Unmanned
Systems and the Military Applications of Artificial Intelligence—the PLA’s Trajectory towards Unmanned, “Intelligentized” Warfare.”
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. February 23.
https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Kania_Testimony.pdf
Klein, A. 2020. “Reducing bias in AI-based financial services.” Brookings Institution Report, July 10.
https://www.brookings.edu/research/reducing-bias-in-ai-based-financial-services/
Kozyrkov, Cassie. 2018. “Why Businesses Fail at Machine Learning.” Hacker Noon, June 28.
https://hackernoon.com/why-businesses-fail-at-machine-learning-fbff41c4d5db
Kratsios, M. 2020. ”Artificial intelligence can serve democracy: the G7 launches a new global partnership Thursday,” Wall Street Journal,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/artificial-intelligence-can-serve-democracy-11590618319

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
39

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Lannquist, Ashley. 2017. “Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies and the New Decentralized Economy: Part 2 – Blockchain-Based Apps.”
Medium: Blockchain at Berkeley, June 30.
https://medium.com/blockchain-at-berkeley/blockchains-cryptocurrencies-the-new-decentralized-economy-part-2-blockchain-based-apps-e6ea71236ca
Lannquist, Yolanda and others. 2020. “The Intersection and Governance of Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity.”
The Future Society. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341412701_The_Intersection_and_Governance_of_Artificial
Lee, Kai-Fu. 2018. AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley and the New World Order. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Lin, H. 2016. Governance of Information Technology and Cyber Weapons in Governance of Dual-Use Technologies: Theory and Practice.
Cambridge, MA: American Academy of Arts & Sciences.
Lindauer, D. and L. Pritchett. 2002. “What’s the Big Idea? The Third Generation of Policies for Economic Growth.”
Economia 3 (1): 1-36, Fall 2002.
Loucks, J. and others. 2019. “Future in the balance? How countries are pursuing an AI advantage: Insights from Deloitte’s State of AI in the
Enterprise, 2nd Edition survey.” Deloitte Insights, May 1.
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/cognitive-technologies/ai-investment-by-country.html
Lyon, David. 2009. “Surveillance, Power, and Everyday Life.” In The Oxford Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies,
edited by Chrisanthi Avgerou, Robin Mansell, Danny Quah, and Roger Silverstone. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Macron, Emmanuel. 2018. Discours du Président de la République sur l’intelligence artificielle, Paris Collège de France, March 29.
https://www.elysee.fr/emmanuel-macron/2018/03/29/discours-du-president-de-la-republique-sur-lintelligence-artificielle
Manyika, James and others. 2017. Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: Workforce Transitions in a Time of Automation. McKinsey Global Institute.
Mari, Angelica. 2017. “Brazilian Government Defines IoT Priorities.” ZDNet, July 10.
https://www.zdnet.com/article/brazilian-government-defines-iot-priorities/
Mari, Angelica. 2019. “Microsoft Launches AI Skills Initiative in Brazil.” ZDNet, February 14.
https://www.zdnet.com/article/microsoft-launches-ai-skills-initiative-in-brazil/
Mazzucato, Mariana. 2015. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. New York: Public Affairs.
McKinsey & Company. 2017. Digitally Enabled Automation and Artificial Intelligence: Shaping the Future of Work in Europe’s Digital
Front-Runners.
McKinsey & Company. 2019. “Can AI Help Society as Much as it Helps Business?” McKinsey Quarterly. August.
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/can-artificial-intelligence-help-society-as-much-as-it-helpsbusiness
McKinsey Global Institute. 2020. “How to Ensure Artificial Intelligence Benefits Society: A Conversation with Stuart Russell and James
Manyika.” January.
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/
Mehrabi, N. and others. 2019. “A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09635.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
40

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Mercer, Christina, and Laurie Clarke. 2018, “Banned Technologies from Across the World.” Techworld, September 24.
https://www.techworld.com/picture-gallery/apps-wearables/blocked-technologies-you-didnt-know-about-3627422/
Miailhe, N. and others. 2019. AI for Sustainable Development Goals, Delphi Special Issue page 207.
https://delphi.lexxion.eu/article/DELPHI/2019/4/10
Microsoft and EY. 2019. Artificial Intelligence in Middle East and North Africa. Report commissioned by Microsoft and conducted by EY.
https://info.microsoft.com/rs/157-GQE-382/images/MicrosoftSouthAfricanreportSRGCM1070.pdf
Microsoft and PwC. 2018. Uncovering AI in Finland: 2018 Field Guide to AI. Microsoft and PwC Digital Services.
https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/2185773/Julkaisut/uncovering-ai-in-finland.pdf
Miner, A.S., Laranjo, L. and A. Baki Kocaballi. 2020. “Chatbots in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.”
npj Digital Medicine (Nature), 3 (65). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-0280-0
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment. 2017. Finland’s Age of Artificial Intelligence: Turning Finland into a Leading Country in the
Application of Artificial Intelligence.
https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/160391/TEMrap_47_2017_verkkojulkaisu.pdf
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment. 2019. Leading the Way into the Era of Artificial Intelligence.
Final Report of Finland’s Artificial Intelligence Programme 2019.
http://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/handle/10024/161688
Ministry of Finance. 2018a. “Digital Economy and Society Index: Finland has EU’s Best Digital Public Services.” News Item, May 23.
https://vm.fi/en/article/-/asset_publisher/digitaalitalouden-ja-yhteiskunnan-indeksi-suomessa-eu-n-parhaat-julkiset-digitaaliset-palvelut
Ministry of Finance. 2018b. “Proposal for Establishing Information Policy as a New Policy Sector in Finland.” Press Release, December 5.
https://valtioneuvosto.fi/en/article/-/asset_publisher/10623/tietopolitiikasta-uusi-politikka-alue-suomeen
Ministry of Finance. 2019. AuroraAI – Towards a Human-Centric Society. Helsinki: Ministry of Finance.
https://vm.fi/documents/10623/1464506/AuroraAI+development+and+implementation+plan+2019–2023.pdf
Miriri, Duncan. 2018. “Kenya to Publish Draft Data Protection Bill this Month: Minister.” Reuters, June 11.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-kenya-dataprotection/kenya-to-publish-draft-data-protection-bill-this-month-minister-idUSKBN1J71S5
MMC Ventures. 2019. The State of AI 2019 Divergence.
https://www.mmcventures.com/The-State-of-AI-2019-Divergence.pdf
Mulgan, G. 2019. “Why Regulation Needs an Overhaul.” Nesta (Blog), March 12.
https://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/regulation-needs-overhaul/
Murison, Malek. 2018. “Brazil’s National IoT Strategy Gets the Green Light.” Internet of Business, March 28.
https://internetofbusiness.com/brazil-national-iot-strategy/
Mzekandaba, Simnikiwe. 2019. “ANC Promises to Bolster Tech Innovation.” ITWeb, January 14.
https://www.itweb.co.za/content/GxwQDM1A9BrMlPVo
National Communication Authority. 2018. Ghana’s Digital Agenda.
https://www.nca.org.gh/assets/Uploads/Key-NCA-Projects-2018.pdf

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
41

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Ndichu, David. 2018. “Microsoft to Set Up Two Data Centers in the UAE.” ITP.net, March 14.
http://www.itp.net/616782-microsoft-to-set-up-two-data-centres-in-the-uae
Nesta. 2019. “Anticipatory Regulation,” Nesta.
https://www.nesta.org.uk/feature/innovation-methods/anticipatory-regulation/
Nesta. 2020. “The AI Powered State: China’s approach to public sector innovation,” Nesta.
https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/Nesta_TheAIPoweredState_2020.pdf
Niiler, Eric. 2020. “An AI Epidemiologist Sent the First Warnings of the Wuhan Virus.” Wired, January 25.
https://www.wired.com/story/ai-epidemiologist-wuhan-public-health-warnings/
NITI Aayog. 2018. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence. Discussion Paper.
https://niti.gov.in/writereaddata/files/document_publication/NationalStrategy-for-AI-Discussion-Paper.pdf
Nos, Irina. 2017. “Kazakhstan’s Modernisation 3.0 is to create a completely new, non-commodity economic model, minister says.”
https://astanatimes.com/2017/04/kazakhstans-modernisation-3-0-is-to-create-a-completely-new-non-commodity-economic-model-minister-says
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
2017, Big Data: Bringing Competition Policy to the Digital Era. Paris: OECD.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
Centers Of Excellence As A Tool For Capability Building Case Study: Canada.
https://www.oecd.org/sti/center%20of%20excellence%20-%20canada.pdf
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
2019a. Artificial Intelligence in Society. Paris: OECD.
https://www.oecd.org/publications/artificial-intelligence-in-society-eedfee77-en.htm
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
2019b. Measuring the Digital Transformation: A Roadmap for the Future. Paris: OECD.
https://www.oecd.org/publications/measuring-the-digital-transformation-9789264311992-en.htm
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development).
2020. Using artificial intelligence to help combat COVID-19.
https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/using-artificial-intelligence-to-help-combat-covid-19-ae4c5c21/
Oxford Business Group. 2018. “Young Egyptians Gain ICT Capabilities and Entrepreneurial Skills with New Programs.”
in The Report: Egypt 2018. London: Oxford Business Group.
https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/analysis/brain-gain-multiple-initiatives-launched-develop-ict-capabilities-and-entrepreneurial-skills-young
Oxford Insights. 2020. Government AI Readiness Index 2020. Malvern: Oxford Insights.
https://www.oxfordinsights.com/government-ai-readiness-index-2020
Pekkarinen, Aino. 2019. “Significant Boost for AI Research from the Academy of Finland.” Press Release. FCAI, January 8.
https://www.helsinki.fi/en/news/data-science-news/significant-boost-for-ai-research-from-the-academy-of-finland

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
42

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Perrault, Raymond, Yoav Shoham, Erik Brynjolfsson, Jack Clark, John Etchemendy, Barbara Grosz, Terah Lyons, James Manyika, Saurabh
Mishra, and Juan Carlos Niebles, “The AI Index 2019 Annual Report”, AI Index Steering Committee, Human-Centered AI Institute, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, December 2019.
Poikola, Antti, Kai Kuikkaniemi, and Harri Honko. 2014. My Data - A Nordic Model for Human-Centered Personal Data Management and
Processing. Ministry of Transport and Communications. http://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/78439/MyData-nordic-model.pdf
Presidencia de la Nation. 2018. Plan Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial. Buenos Aires.
https://www.uai.edu.ar/ciiti/2019/buenos-aires/downloads/B1/JA-Plan-Nacional-IA.pdf
Prime Minister of Kazakhstan. 2017. “The President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev’s Address to the Nation of Kazakhstan. January 31,
2017.” http://www.akorda.kz/en/addresses/addresses_of_president/the-president-of-kazakhstan-nursultan-nazarbayevs-address-to-the-nation-of-kazakhstan-january-31-2017
Purdy, Mark and Paul Daugherty. 2016. Why Artificial Intelligence is the Future of Growth. Accenture and Frontier Economics.
https://www.accenture.com/t20170524t055435__w__/ca-en/_acnmedia/pdf-52/accenture-why-ai-is-the-future-of-growth.pdf
PwC. 2017. Sizing the Prize: What’s the Real Value of AI for Your Business and How Can You Capitalise? London.
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/analytics/assets/pwc-ai-analysis-sizing-the-prize-report.pdf
PwC. 2018a. The Macroeconomic Impact of Artificial Intelligence. London.
https://www.pwc.co.uk/economic-services/assets/macroeconomic-impact-of-ai-technical-report-feb-18.pdf
PwC. 2018b. US$320 billion by 2030? The potential impact of AI in the Middle East.
https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/documents/economic-potential-ai-middle-east.pdf
PwC. 2019. Gaining National Competitive Advantage through Artificial Intelligence (AI): Policy Making and National AI Strategies. Luxembourg : PwC. https://www.pwc.lu/en/advisory/digital-tech-impact/technology/gaining-national-competitive-advantage-through-ai.html
Raju, V., Javaid, M., Khan, I.H. and A. Haleem. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications for COVID-19 pandemic.”
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, Vol 14 (4).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2020.04.012
Reality Check Team. 2019. “Huawei: Which Countries are Blocking its 5G Technology?” BBC News, May 18.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-48309132
Republic of Kenya. 2019. Digital Economy Blueprint: Powering Kenya’s Transformation.
https://www.ict.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Kenya-Digital-Economy-2019.pdf
Richardson, Peter and others. 2020. “Baricitinib as potential treatment for 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease”.
The Lancet 395 (10223): E30-E31. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30304-4.
Risse, M. 2018. Human Rights and Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge, MA: Carr Center for Human Rights Policy, Harvard Kennedy School.
Ritchie, H. and M. Roser. 2014. “Natural Disasters.” Our World in Data (revised November 2019).
https://ourworldindata.org/natural-disasters

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
43

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Rodrik, D. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth 21(1).
Rodrik, D. 2017. Straight Talk on Trade: Ideas for a Sane World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, D. 2018. New Technologies, Global Value Chains and the Developing Economies. Background Paper 1,
Pathways for Prosperity Commission.
Roland Berger. 2018. Artificial Intelligence: A Strategy for European Startups. Munich: Roland Berger.
https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Publications/AI-startups-as-innovation-drivers.html?country=null
Savage, N. 2020. “The race to the top among the world’s leaders in artificial intelligence.” Nature, 588, S102-S104.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03409-8
Sawahel, Wagdy. 2019. “First AI faculty Unveiled at Global Forum Meeting.” University World News: Africa Edition, April 5.
https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20190405064313832
Schwab, Klaus. 2015. “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means and How to Respond.” Foreign Affairs, December 12.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/
Scudellari, Megan. 2020. “Five Companies Using AI to Fight Coronavirus: Deep learning models predict old and
new drugs that might successfully treat COVID-19.” IEEE Spectrum, March 19.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-human-os/artificial-intelligence/medical-ai/companies-ai-coronavirus?utm_source=POLITICO.EU&utm_
campaign=817f8bef8e-EMAIL_CAMPAIGN_2020_03_25_09_59&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_10959edeb5-817f8bef8e-190492457
Shankar, S. and others. 2017. “No classification without representation: Assessing geodiversity issues in open data sets for the developing
world.” Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017).
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.08536.pdf
Sharif, N. 2006. “Emergence and development of the National Innovation Systems concept.” Research Policy, 35 (5).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2006.04.001
Shrum, K. and others. 2019. AI and its Impact on Public Administration. Washington, DC: National Academy of Public Administration.
https://www.napawash.org/uploads/Academy_Studies/9781733887106.pdf
Simonite, Tom. 2020. “Chinese Hospitals Deploy AI to Help Diagnose Covid-19.” Wired, February 26.
https://www.wired.com/story/chinese-hospitals-deploy-ai-help-diagnose-covid-19/
Smith, G. and Rustagi, I. 2020. Mitigating Bias in Artificial Intelligence: An Equity Fluent Leadership Playbook. Berkeley, CA:
Berkeley Haas Center for Equity.
https://haas.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/UCB_Playbook_R10_V2_spreads2.pdf
Smith, M. and S. Neupane. 2018. Artificial Intelligence and Human Development: Toward a Research Agenda. International Development
Research Centre. idl-bnc-idrc.dspacedirect.org/handle/10625/56949
Snow, Jackie. 2019 “How Africa is Seizing an AI Opportunity.” Fast Company, March 10.
https://www.fastcompany.com/90308114/how-africa-is-seizing-an-ai-opportunity
Sonneborn, W. and L. Graf. 2020. “How AI can help developing countries rebuild after the pandemic.” World Bank Blogs, September 16.
https://blogs.worldbank.org/digital-development/how-ai-can-help-developing-countries-rebuild-after-pandemic

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
44

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

Stathoulopoulos, Kostas, and Juan Mateos-Garcia. 2019. Gender Diversity in AI Research. London: Nesta.
https://www.nesta.org.uk/report/gender-diversity-ai/
Stebbing, Justin and others. 2020. “COVID-19: Combining Antiviral and Anti-Inflammatory Treatments.”
The Lancet: Infectious Diseases 20 (40): P400-402.
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(20)30132-8/fulltext
Stix, C. 2019. A Survey of the European Union’s Artificial Intelligence Ecosystem. Cambridge: Leverhulme Centre for the Future of
Intelligence, University of Cambridge.
http://lcfi.ac.uk/media/uploads/files/Stix_Europe_AI_Final.pdf
Strusani, D. and G.V. Houngbonon. 2019.
“The Role of Artificial Intelligence in Supporting Development in Emerging Markets.” EM Compass, Note 69.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32365
Takahashi, Dean. 2018. “Dubai and IBM Offer Government-Endorsed Blockchain Platform in UAE.” VentureBeat, October 29.
https://venturebeat.com/2018/10/29/dubai-and-ibm-offer-government-endorsed-blockchain-platform-in-uae/
Taulli, Tom. 2019. “SF Facial Recognition Ban: What Now for AI (Artificial Intelligence)? Forbes, May 19.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomtaulli/2019/05/19/sf-facial-recognition-ban-what-now-for-ai-artificial-intelligence/#2d15c61c2e96
UN Science-Policy-Business Forum on the Environment. 2018. Digital Earth: Building, Financing and Governing a Digital Ecosystem for
Planetary Data, White Paper, Draft 1.2.
https://un-spbf.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/White-Paper-Draft.pdf
UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel. 2019. The Age of Digital Interdependence. Report of the UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel
on Digital Cooperation.
https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation-report-for%20web.pdf
USAID.2018. Reflecting the Past, Shaping the Future: Making AI Work for International Development. Washington, DC.
https://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/15396/AI-ML-in-Development.pdf
Villani, C. and others. 2018. For a Meaningful Artificial Intelligence: Towards a French and European Strategy.
Paris: Conseil national du numérique.
Vinuesa, R., Azizpour, H., Leite, I. et al. 2020. The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
Nature Communications, 11, 233.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14108-y
Whittaker, M. and others. 2018. AI Now Report 2018. New York: AI Now Institute, New York University.
https://ainowinstitute.org/AI_Now_2018_Report.pdf
White House. 2020. American Artificial Intelligence Initiative: Year One Annual Report. Office of Science and Technology Policy.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/American-AI-Initiative-One-Year-Annual-Report.pdf
Winick, Erin. 2018. “Every Study We Could Find on What Automation Will Do to Jobs, in One Chart.” MIT Technology Review, January 25.
https://www.technologyreview.com/2018/01/25/146020/every-study-we-could-find-on-what-automation-will-do-to-jobs-in-one-chart/

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
45

ANALYTICAL INSIGHTS - NOTE 4

World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0671-1.
World Bank. 2019a. Information and Communications for Development 2018: Data-Driven Development. Information and
Communications for Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1325-2.
World Bank. 2019b. Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A): Diagnostic Tool and Guidelines for Task Teams. Version 2.0.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2019c. World Development Report 2019: The Changing Nature of Work.
Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1328-3.
World Bank. 2020. World Development Report 2021 Webinar. Webinar Presentation. June 3, 2020.
Yamamoto, C. 2017, “Associação Brasileira de Inteligência Artificial – ABRIA.” Oráculo TI, 31 May.
https://oraculoti.com.br/2017/05/31/associacao-brasileira-de-inteligencia-artificial-abria/
Yampolskiy, R. 2018. Current State of Knowledge on Failures of AI-Enabled Products. Consortium for Safer AI.

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment
46

worldbank.org/digitaldevelopment

Analytical Insights
DIGITAL DEVELOPMENT

