Executive Summary
As technology has become increasingly central to strategic competition with Russiaand China, export controls have moved to the forefront of U.S. foreign policy ontechnology issues. Most notably, restricting Russia’s access to advanced technologythrough export controls is a key part of the U.S. response to Russia’s invasion ofUkraine, as U.S. government offi cials have
repeatedly stated
.
Unfortunately, nearly all the debate is focused on whether and when to apply exportcontrols, not how to ensure that export controls are eff ectively administered andenforced once applied.
The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) at the Department of Commerce overseesmost export controls. Unfortunately, BIS is increasingly challenged by worldwidesmuggling and export control evasion networks, especially those that are supportedby Russia and China. Investigators have examined the
wreckage
of downed Russianweapons systems in Ukraine and found that they contain U.S. and allied components,including electronics that were manufactured years after the implementation of the2014 Russia export controls.
Given the dramatically expanded anti-Russia export controls of 2022, Russia is certainto devote signifi cantly more resources to evading these controls to keep its warmachine and economy functioning. As Russia pursues increasingly aggressive andbetter-resourced means of obtaining critical technology, BIS must use every toolavailable to increase capacity and productivity for eff ective enforcement. Ongoingeff orts to starve Russian military forces of advanced technology underscore theurgency behind reevaluating the current export enforcement regime and fortifying itscapabilities for a new and more complex geostrategic environment.
In October 2022, the Biden administration further expanded the scope of U.S. exportcontrols when it released two new rules aimed at severely restricting Chinese artifi cialintelligence (AI) and semiconductor capabilities. A recent CSIS report,
Choking Off China’s Access to the Future of AI
, assesses these controls in detail. What is novelabout these controls is that they represent a sea change in the U.S. approach to China,particularly since the controls are both geographic in nature and unilateral. Theadministration has also indicated recently that it is shifting from a policy focused ondelaying adversaries’ technological advancements to one of directly degrading them.
Though less severe than those imposed on Russia, these new export controls areintended to prevent China from achieving key strategic priorities. Both Russia andChina are doubtless devoting massively increased resources to evading the newexport controls.
At a time when the need for robust U.S. export controls is more strategically criticalthan at any time since the end of the Cold War, BIS’s enabling technology is in adreadful state. The cause is simple: decades of underinvestment. Current and formerBIS staff state that the major government databases that they use to monitor tradefl ows and identify suspicious activity can perform only a fraction of the neededfunctionality and crash routinely. Instead of knowledge graph databases and machinelearning—capabilities that have revolutionized both the private sector and otherfederal agencies with similar missions—BIS analysts perform their work primarilyusing Google searches and Microsoft Excel.
Modern, data-driven digital technologies utilizing AI and machine learning can andshould play an integral role in enhancing BIS export control enforcement capabilities.Relatively modest investments could lead to 5 to 10 times greater analyst productivity.Despite the increasingly pressing need to invest in these new enforcementcapabilities, the
budget
of BIS has not increased commensurate with the increasednumber of export-controlled items, the evolving threat landscape, and the growingpressure from an increasingly sophisticated evasion regime.
The current international momentum behind U.S.-led export controls presents aunique opportunity both to help solve a pressing problem—responding to Russia’sinvasion of Ukraine—and to advance the adoption of digital technology by U.S.government agencies for mission impact. A changed geopolitical landscape demandsreinvigorated U.S. government export controls capacity, and this cannot be donewithout additional resources. CSIS analysis of relevant comparable data-driven digitaltechnology modernization eff orts by other U.S. government agencies with similarmission requirements suggests that this could be accomplished with an additionalappropriation for technology modernization at BIS of roughly $25 million annually forfi ve years. This funding would allow BIS to better ingest, connect, and analyzehundreds of billions of records from both government and open-source data. By
applying modern data science and machine learning techniques, BIS could increaseproductivity across all its processes: for example, automatically detecting that apurported Eastern European “tractor manufacturer” has the same phone number as asupplier of engines to the Russian military. This fi gure accounts for opportunities atBIS to improve collaboration with other U.S. government agencies and the need toprevent unnecessary duplication of eff ort.
However, a more productive enforcement analysis community will identify moreentities as likely shell companies engaging in illicit transactions. This will in turnincrease the need for enforcement agents to conduct site inspections or criminalinvestigations of these identifi ed entities. Despite the severe current technologicallimitations on the effi cacy of the analytic community, its work is already identifyingenough candidate entities for inspection to more than fully consume the capacity ofthe current staff . Therefore, in addition to the $25 million annual increase for fi veyears to support new technology and staff for BIS analytical capabilities, BIS will alsorequire an additional $18.4 million and 48 positions annually for the ExportEnforcement organization as well as another $1.2 million for additional classifi edfacility space for these individuals to support the classifi ed aspects of their work.Thus, the total size of the recommended additional BIS budget appropriation is $44.6million annually.
In terms of return on investment, this increase in BIS’s budget by $44.6 millionannually is likely to be one of the best opportunities available anywhere in U.S.national security. The U.S. government is currently spending tens of billions to assistUkraine in destroying the weapons of Russia’s military, which too often are poweredby U.S. technology. Providing a few tens of millions of dollars annually to BIS tomodernize the technology that enables export controls enforcement would go a longway toward ensuring that far fewer Russian and Chinese weapons using U.S.technology are built in the future.
Report
As technology has become increasingly central to strategic competition withRussia and China, export controls have moved to the forefront of U.S. nationalsecurity.
After the end of the Cold War, export controls became a somewhat niche topic withinU.S. national security policy, focused principally on regulating sales of military itemsand restricting the spread of weapons of mass destruction. Controls on dual-usetechnologies, those that can be used for both military and commercial purposes,sought to balance the national security benefi t of restricting sales with the parallelgoal of enabling high-technology companies to maintain revenue streams fromexports that supported their development of next-generation technologies.
However, this changed with the run-up to Russia’s unlawful invasion of Ukraine inFebruary 2022. Speaking on behalf of the Biden administration on February 23,Deputy Treasury Secretary Wally Adeyemo
said
:
The key thing that [Russian] President Putin needs to consider is whether he wants toensure that Russia’s economy is able to grow, that he has the resources he needs to beable to project power in the future. If he chooses to invade, what we’re telling himvery directly, is that we're going to cut that off .
We’re going to cut him off from Western technology that’s critical to advancing hismilitary, cut him off from Western fi nancial resources that will be critical for feedinghis economy and also to enriching himself.
As Adeyemo’s statement indicates, the United States views technology export controlsnot only as a defensive measure to limit the spread of weapons but as a powerful toolof national security—capable of deterring or punishing actions contrary to U.S. andallied interests. When the United States and its allies did successfully agree on amultilateral regime of export controls against Russia, export controls moved back tothe forefront of U.S. national security policy.
In September 2023, National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan
said
that the Russianexport controls “demonstrated that technology export controls can be more than justa preventative tool. If implemented in a way that is robust, durable, andcomprehensive, they can be a new strategic asset in the U.S. and allied toolkit toimpose costs on adversaries, and even over time degrade their battlefi eldcapabilities.”
More recently, on October 7, the Biden administration enacted a major set of exportcontrols that restricted the sale of AI and semiconductor technology to China. Thenew export controls dramatically reduce China’s prospects for becoming asuperpower in AI technology and likewise reduce China’s prospects for being self-suffi cient in semiconductor technology.
When targeted correctly and enforced eff ectively, export controls are apowerful tool of foreign policy, as seen in the 2018 restrictions onsemiconductor sales to ZTE and Huawei.
Export controls are critical to competing in this new era. Though the Bidenadministration’s threats of export controls and sanctions did not successfully deterRussia’s 2022 invasion, there is ample recent evidence of their power. The UnitedStates’ leading position in key technology sectors, such as semiconductors, off ersstrong points of foreign policy leverage. In April 2018, the United States
imposedsanctions
upon Huawei and ZTE—China’s fi rst- and second-largest telecommunicationsequipment companies, respectively, at the time—as a penalty for violating the terms ofan earlier settlement. In a matter of months, the ZTE sanctions, which, along withother restrictions, prevented the company from buying U.S.-designedsemiconductors, rapidly transformed ZTE’s fi nancial situation from signifi cantprofi tability and
rapid growth
to
imminent bankruptcy
. Huawei, for its part, lostaccess to U.S. semiconductor design software. As a result, Huawei’s smartphone chipdesign subsidiary, HiSilicon, was forced to halt most operations, and Huawei is
nolonger
one of the fi ve largest global smartphone manufacturers.
The Huawei and ZTE export controls were a potent reminder to the U.S. foreign policycommunity of the power of export controls. U.S. technology export controls were ableto do signifi cant damage to the fi nancial prospects of leading Chinese technologygiants. The United States did this entirely with non-violent means and at a limited costto the U.S. economy.
However, major weaknesses in U.S. export control enforcement capacity areevident, as demonstrated by Russia’s success in evading controls for weaponsused in Ukraine.
There is a risk of drawing too much optimism from examples such as Huawei andZTE. The concentrated nature of the advanced semiconductor manufacturing sectormade these controls easier to enforce than many others. Additionally, export controlsare, in some ways, like a sawblade that can become duller and less eff ective withrepeated use. It remains critical that export controls are not only applied strategicallyand judiciously but that suffi cient resources are also devoted to re-sharpening theblade.
As every street corner narcotics dealer knows, there is a major diff erence between abusiness transaction being illegal and it being impossible. The U.S. export licensingand administration process determines whether or not an international sale by a U.S.entity is permissible, but the effi cacy of enforcement of the controls determineswhether or not such sales will succeed when they are attempted and whether theterms of the license are honored subsequent to export. There are a variety of tacticsthat illicit actors can use to gain access to U.S. technology in defi ance of exportcontrols, ranging from outright theft and smuggling to the use of shell companies thathide the identity of an unlawful end user behind a front company falsely purportingto be purchasing the item legally. Former Department of Commerce and U.S.intelligence community offi cials interviewed for this project said that it can sometimestake the Russian and Chinese military mere days to successfully set up a shellcompany for purchasing U.S. technology, while the current process for uncovering ashell company’s illegal activity may take years, if it is uncovered at all.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has off ered new opportunities to assess the technologiesbeing used in Russian military systems and therefore the effi cacy of prior exportcontrols. Research by Confl ict Armament Research (CAR), a UK-based investigativeorganization that analyzes supply chains from the weapons recovered from confl ictzones, has worked with the Security Service of Ukraine to analyze Russian weaponsused in that confl ict. CAR’s investigation
found that
the “Russian military industry hadbeen able to obtain key components for UAVs—such as GPS modules, electronic parts,cameras, and engines—from Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and the United States,both before and after the start of the confl ict in Ukraine in 2014.”
This is important because the United States
signifi cantly expanded
export controls onsales to Russia of many dual-use technologies following Russia’s initial invasion ofEastern Ukraine in 2014 and military support to separatists, particularly the Westernmicroelectronics that Russia is heavily dependent on for its advanced weaponssystems. Damien Spleeters, one of the authors of the CAR study, said in an
interview
that markings on some of the Western-produced electronics indicated that they weremanufactured years after 2014. “It’s signifi cant for me because it shows that even afterRussia took Crimea and the fi rst package of sanctions were taken against them, theystill managed to acquire critical technology, critical components for important piecesof equipment that they are now using against Ukraine,” he said.
Other organizations examining Russian weapons from Ukraine have produced moreevidence of the same conclusion. A
report
by the Royal United Services Institute forDefense and Security Studies (RUSI) found that:
RUSI discovered at least 450 diff erent kinds of unique foreign-made componentsacross these 27 systems. . . . Of these, at least 80 diff erent kinds of components weresubject to export controls by the US, indicating that Russia’s military–industrialcomplex has, in recent decades, been able to successfully evade US export controls.
. . .
Western-designed components found in a Kalibr cruise missile, for example, appearto date to 2018 and 2019—four years after a wide range of sanctions and exportcontrols targeted Russian military end users following the Kremlin’s invasion ofUkraine.
RUSI also found evidence of Russians having scratched out identifi cation markings onthe components, indicating deliberate eff orts to make it more diffi cult for investigatorsto determine how export controls are being successfully evaded.
To be clear, the fi ndings by both CAR and RUSI suggest that the majority of U.S.microelectronics being used by the Russian military were likely acquired prior to theexpansion of export controls in 2014, when doing so would have been much easier,though still disallowed in cases where the end user was known to be a military entity.
However, their fi ndings demonstrate that Russia has successfully continued acquiringsuch technology even after export controls were expanded in 2014.
Following Russia’s enlarged invasion of Ukraine in early 2022, the United States and itsallies
enacted
a far stricter regime of export controls and sanctions against Russia thatwill, in many ways, be far more diffi cult to evade. Despite this, the Russian defensesector continues to express optimism about its ability to evade export controls. Forexample, the president of Kalashnikov, a major Russian weapons manufacturer,
recently said
, “[There are] no problems getting [chips], because the component basecannot be 100% closed off to Russia. It is impossible to isolate Russia from the entireglobal electronic component base. It’s a fantasy to think otherwise.”
[1]
Similarly, recent U.S. government export control policy changes have includedacknowledgments that prior eff orts against China’s military often have beenineff ective.
On October 7, 2022, the Department of Commerce announced
major changes
toexport control policies toward China for the procurement of advanced AI andsemiconductor technology used in both commercial and military AI systems. Thispolicy document included important acknowledgments that previous export controlapproaches—based on restricting the sale of dual-use technologies to military endusers or for military end uses—had diminished in eff ectiveness over the past decade.Specifi cally, the new policy
stated
that controls prior to October 7 “generally onlyapply when the ‘U.S. person’ has knowledge that their activities are contributing toprohibited end uses or end users. China’s military-civil fusion eff ort makes it morediffi cult to tell which items are made for restricted end uses, thereby diminishing theeff ect of these existing controls.”
The diffi culty of enforcing these controls eff ectively is also evident from examinationsof Chinese military equipment procurement eff orts. Researchers at the Center forSecurity and Emerging Technology (CSET) analyzed 24 public procurement contractsawarded by the Chinese military and state-owned defense companies for AI-relatedmilitary systems.
CSET found
that nearly all the identifi able chips in militaryprocurement records were designed by U.S. companies and successfully purchased indefi ance of U.S. restrictions. In other words, in each of these cases, the Chinese
military was openly advertising its intention to circumvent U.S. export controls andevidently was able to successfully do so, most likely by hiding the purchases formilitary end users behind Chinese academic or commercial shell organizations.
While the CSET study was focused on the recent procurement of AI chips, the U.S.government has been
expressing concern
for years that China is too often succeedingin evading export controls on a much broader range of technologies. BIS has somefl exibility to change its approach to regulation in order to make enforcement easierand more eff ective, as it did with the October 7 regulatory changes, but only Congresscan appropriate additional resources for export license application review and exportcontrol enforcement.
Given the dramatic recent expansion of U.S. and allied export controls againstRussia and China, these countries are certain to be massively increasing eff ortsto evade such controls.
Two of the largest expansions of U.S. and allied export controls in decades occurredin 2022: those targeting Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine and thosetargeting China in response to its AI military modernization eff orts and military-civilfusion policy.
If successfully enforced, these export controls would be devastating to both countries.Russia needs Western technology in order to continue manufacturing weapons towage its war in Ukraine and also to prevent an economic disaster. While the newrecent export controls against China are not an existential threat to the regime oreven a major eff ort at decoupling China from the U.S. economy, they are a directattempt to
stop
the Chinese government from achieving two of its top priorities: AIexcellence and self-reliance in semiconductors. AI was the
top technology priority
listed in the Chinese government’s fi ve-year economic plan for 2021 to 2026, andachieving
self-reliance
in semiconductors has been a major feature of Xi Jinping’sspeeches since he became general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party in 2012.
From the perspective of China and Russia, U.S. export controls are infl icting tens ofbillions of dollars of economic pain, an even greater amount of lost future economicgrowth potential, and threatening critical strategic objectives. All of these losses
represent the opportunity for a huge return on investment for Chinese and Russianorganizations that successfully evade these export controls. While there is no realisticway to reliably measure how much Russia and China are increasing their investmentin export control evasion activity, there is every reason to suspect that both countriesare massively increasing such investments. Russia, in particular, has passed laws thatare explicitly intended to assist its companies with violating foreign trade restrictions.For example, in March 2022, Russia
passed laws
that make it legal to import mostexport-controlled goods without the trademark owner’s consent and to violate manyforeign intellectual property rights.
Therefore, it is premature for the United States to suggest that its recentexport controls on Russia will achieve its intended objectives withoutadditional resources for enforcement.
To date, U.S. government offi cials have expressed signifi cant optimism that exportcontrols are achieving their intended objectives of cutting Russia off from Westerntechnology that is needed for economic growth and military power. In a June 2022interview, Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo
stated
that the controls werecausing a chip shortage that was “crippling” the Russian military: “U.S. exports toRussia in the categories where we have export controls, including semiconductors,are down by over 90 percent since Feb. 24. . . . so that is crippling.”
Raimondo’s statement is consistent with published government trade data, though thepicture is slightly better for Russia once data from countries other than the UnitedStates are included. Bruegel, a European economic think tank, analyzed data onexports to Russia from 34 countries and found that Russian imports of computers,telecommunications equipment, and microelectronics
declined by 75 percent
between December 2021 and April 2022 before increasing slightly in June. That said,offi cial fi gures do not always tell the whole story, as they rarely include illicittransactions.
Even some of the legal data that is available gives cause for concern, suggesting thatRussia is diverting its trade through other third-party countries that continue to dobusiness with both Russia and the West. This includes falsely labeling shipments asnon-controlled goods and
buying fi nished goods
that contain controlled
microelectronics and stripping those goods for parts. For export control enforcementorganizations, such activities are diffi cult to track at the required speed and scale.
There is no doubt that U.S. and allied export controls have made life harder forRussian weapons manufacturers, but it is premature to say that they are “crippling”the Russian war machine. Over time, whatever eff ect the controls are having is aslikely to weaken as it is to strengthen. Enforcement has been diffi cult and will onlybecome more complicated over time as Russian and third-state evasion tacticsbecome increasingly advanced. As one interviewee for this project said, “As you getbetter at picking the low-hanging fruit, your adversary has an incentive to get moresophisticated. [Russian networks] have the benefi t of the Soviet Union experiencewith a long history of export control evasion.”
The October 7, 2022, package of export controls against China is too new forcomparable data to be available at the time of this writing, but the same cautionapplies: published government data does not necessarily tell the whole story, whichmust focus on both licit and illicit transactions.
For BIS, the scale and complexity of U.S. export control requirements haveincreased massively over the past three years due to new legislative andexecutive requirements.
For those exports that do require a license, the typical process for export controlsadministration and enforcement is depicted in Figure 1.
Increasingly sophisticated and well-resourced attempts by Russian and Chineseorganizations to evade export controls are not the only reason that BIS’s job hasbecome signifi cantly harder in recent years. Legislation and executive orders haveposed new challenges to BIS in administering and enforcing export controls in at leastthree ways.
First, new responsibilities have been added to BIS without additional resources tocarry them out. For example, in 2021, the responsibility for regulating andadministering exports of fi rearms
moved
from the Department of State to theDepartment of Commerce. However, none of the staff or budget that was performingthis function made a move. Similarly, two
executive
orders
during the Trumpadministration made the Department of Commerce responsible for a broad swath ofactivities regulating imports of foreign telecommunications equipment, a jobultimately given to BIS. In the Biden administration’s Commerce Department budgetrequest for FY 2023, BIS has
identifi ed
more than $53 million in unfundedrequirements from recent legislation and executive orders.
Second, the size of both the Commerce Control List and the lists of parties of concernhave expanded signifi cantly. Rising tensions with both Russia and China led theTrump administration and now the Biden administration to expand usage of theentity list. After the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, BISimposed
tighter restrictions
on exports to Russia. On February 24, 2022, BIS
instituted
license requirements for exporting controlled commodities to Russia, including allproducts on the Commerce Control List and Export Control Classifi cation Numberscategories 3–9. This
includes
goods such as semiconductors, microelectronics,telecommunications, lasers, sensors, navigation equipment, marine equipment, andaircraft components. BIS also
expanded
the list of entities prohibited from selling andexporting U.S. goods to Russia.
According to the BIS FY 2023 budget
request
, BIS processed 41,446 licenseapplications in FY 2021. This represents a 9.4 percent increase from FY 2020, when37,895 applications were processed. Of the 41,446 processed applications, 35,630(86.0 percent) were approved, 5,109 applications (12.3 percent) were returnedwithout action, and 707 (1.7 percent) were denied. The total value of applications
processed and approved in 2020 was $1.3 trillion and $340.5 billion, respectively.Following the release of the two new rules controlling AI semiconductor technologyexports to China, BIS estimates that it will need to review at least an additional
1,600licenses
annually.
Third, the government has become increasingly creative in creating complex newrules that are often more diffi cult to administer and enforce. For example, the U.S.approach to export controls has changed signifi cantly via the Foreign Direct Product(
FDP
) Rule, which consists of an extraterritorial application of U.S. export controls onitems manufactured with U.S. equipment, inputs, or design. The application of theFDP rule
imposes
new license requirements on exports to Russia and China andinstitutes a presumption of denial policy for license applications for exports or re-exports to Russia and China. The FDP rule is
intended
to restrict Russia and China’sabilities to acquire critical goods such as microelectronics, telecommunications items,and other components with military applications, including from third countries.
The BIS budget for core export control activities has not even kept pace withinfl ation since FY 2020 and has declined in real terms. The FY 2023 budgetrequest did not address this.
Despite the increased burden on BIS to ensure eff ective enforcement of export controlrules, the increase in available funding for equipping BIS with new licensing andenforcement technology has not increased commensurate with the addedenforcement responsibility. The Biden administration’s budget submission for FY2023 does include a request for a $66 million increase in the BIS budget. However,upon further inspection, this budget increase is less than it may seem. A full $36million of the increase is for a new program called Information and CommunicationTechnologies and Services (ICTS), which is an entirely new and previously unfundedBIS mission focused on policing U.S. imports of foreign technology, such as Huaweitelecommunications equipment. An additional $23 million of the BIS budget requestshould be understood as addressing the loss of purchasing power due to infl ationsince FY 2020. In short, the demands upon BIS to perform its core function of exportcontrols administration and enforcement have increased massively since the start of
FY 2020, but as of FY 2022, the BIS budget has actually decreased after accounting forinfl ation (see Figure 2).
As shown in Figure 2, even if the Biden administration succeeds in getting itsrequested budget passed by Congress for FY 2023, nearly 90 percent of the requested$66 million increase will go toward fi ghting infl ation and new missions unrelated toexport controls. Furthermore, the request fi gure was developed prior to Russia’sinvasion of Ukraine and the new packages of export controls that have been directedtoward Russia and China.
In short, the BIS budget is grossly inadequate to keep pace with the changing exportcontrol administration and enforcement challenges. This is especially true given themajor additional eff orts presumably being devoted to export control evasion by Russiaand China.
The current state of enabling digital technology for data analysis at BIS isextremely poor. BIS is signifi cantly behind not only the private sector but also
other federal agencies.
Across the more than 50 individuals interviewed for this project—including currentand former government offi cials from BIS and other federal agencies, industryexecutives regulated by BIS, and technology experts—nearly everyone expressedsignifi cant concern and frustration over the extremely poor state of BIS’s existingtechnology.
Broadly, there are three sources of data that are needed for BIS to be able toeff ectively perform its functions across controls list management, licenseadministration, and export control enforcement. These three data sources are (1)internal Commerce Department data; (2) data shared from other governmentagencies, particularly those involved in trade, law enforcement, and intelligence; and(3) open-source data that is either freely available on the internet or purchasable fromprivate sector data aggregators.1.
Internal Commerce Data:
Current and former government offi cials uniformlystated that BIS internal digital infrastructure and databases are in extremely poorshape. For example, the primary government database used for trade transactionscontains tens of billions of records. However, multiple interviewees stated that thesystem is so unreliable that an identical data search query executed twice in a rowwill not necessarily retrieve identical records, as various parts of the system areoften crashing or otherwise non-responsive. The system’s user interface is alsocomplicated and non-intuitive, meaning that new analysts take a long time tobecome fully profi cient in using the system. Moreover, internal CommerceDepartment data only covers direct U.S. exports and thus has a major gap inmonitoring the re-export of U.S. goods from transshipment countries.2.
Data from Other Federal Agencies:
Representatives from other governmentagencies, including the intelligence community, stated that BIS’s outdated digitalinfrastructure and tools made it diffi cult for them to share vital information withBIS and vice versa. In terms of downloading portions of the databases for sharingand more in-depth analysis, BIS analysts generally only have access to outdatedversions of Microsoft Excel, a far cry from the more modern knowledge graph and
data analytic platforms that have become common among both commercialindustry and agencies in government with similar mission requirements as BIS.3.
Open-Source Data:
However, BIS’s greatest defi ciencies are arguably in takingadvantage of open-source data and data that is available for purchase from theprivate sector. Government offi cials requested that CSIS refrain from publishingextensive detail regarding all the open data sources that BIS currently uses orshould utilize. This is because governments such as China and Russia that supportexport control evasion networks have a history of changing their behavior inresponse to BIS disclosures about sources and methods, as well as from scholarlyreports about export controls evasion activity. The authors of this report agree thatthis caution is warranted. However, it is fair to say that BIS is far too reliant uponpublic internet search engines and is only taking advantage of a tiny fraction of theopen-source data and data analysis capabilities that are available in the privatesector. In this regard, BIS is not only signifi cantly behind the private sector but alsosignifi cantly behind other federal agencies who also have missions where open-source data is useful, such as the Departments of Defense, Homeland Security, andTreasury, as well as intelligence community organizations.
Private sector compliance resources are critical for the viability of U.S. exportcontrols, but they are not a substitute for robust internal capabilities at BIS.
The foundation of the export controls administration and enforcement process is thelists managed by BIS, both the parties of concern lists (e.g., the Entity List) and theCommerce Control List of items. It is the responsibility of BIS to ensure that the lists ofparties of concern accurately capture the parties that U.S. law and policy state shouldbe restricted from transactions with U.S. industry. As an industry interviewee said, “ifthe U.S. government does not want us to do business with an entity, they have to tellus that. They can’t just ask us to know that.” The same is true for sales of certain typesof items. It is the responsibility of the U.S. government to tell industry what is and isnot allowed.
As depicted in the simplifi ed process in Figure 1, the export controls process beginswith an entity (usually a company) submitting an export license application thatprovides information about the seller, buyer, and goods or services being sold. A
company employee will draft the license application after having made an internaldetermination about the believed legality of the transaction. BIS holds numerousannual training and informational seminars in order to clarify the existing regulationsand policies that companies are subject to. Thus, the most signifi cant resourcesdevoted to export controls are actually performed by private sector entities as part oftheir compliance and due diligence activities.
However, the primary goals of U.S. companies are generally legal compliance andmaximizing profi ts, not determining and advancing U.S. national security interestsbeyond what is stated in law and policy. Thus, if the Entity List does a poor jobkeeping pace with the creation of new Chinese and Russian export control evasionnetworks, then the considerable private sector resources devoted to corporatecompliance will sometimes have only a limited eff ect on U.S. national security. Thedegree to which this is the case depends upon the nature of the industry (moreconsolidated industries are easier to track and control than highly fragmented ones)and on the nature of the goods (large, expensive, and durable items that requiresignifi cant post-sale servicing are generally easier to track than industries that rely onlarge-volume sales of inexpensive items).
As mentioned above, recent U.S. policy changes have explicitly acknowledged thatBIS’s ability to update the Entity List is not keeping pace with the creation of shellcompanies. As one former U.S. government offi cial told us, the current policy criteriafor entity listing imply that “thousands of entities belong on the Entity List but are notthere because of lack of resources to do the required analysis.” The research andanalysis required to put an entity on the Entity List require putting together a robustpackage of evidence. The package must include not only verifi ed documentation of,for example, the entity’s ties to foreign military or intelligence organizations, but alsoan assessment of the company’s technology portfolio, licensing history, and an impactanalysis of denying the license that considers the potential for foreign substitution if aU.S. export license is denied. Developing such a package takes weeks or months onceBIS has determined that an entity is suffi ciently suspicious to deserve an assessment,and there are only a small number of analysts at BIS performing this work. As a result,updates to the Entity List often come years after an entity has already successfullyestablished a shell company to evade an initial entity listing. After an evader’s fi rst
shell company is discovered and added to the Entity List, the evader merely creates asecond shell company.
Since companies are primarily basing their export decisions on compliance with thelists and the regulations that apply to them, this means that no amount of privatesector compliance resources and technology can eff ectively substitute for a BIS thatcannot rapidly and eff ectively update the list.
The primary barriers to improving BIS digital and data infrastructure and theeffi cacy of export controls are a lack of funding and a lack of staff with therequired skill sets.
As mentioned earlier in this paper, BIS funding levels adjusted for infl ation have beenfl at for more than a decade. This refl ects the BIS funding and staffi ng levels thatCongress assessed as prudent when the primary focus of national security wasterrorism and U.S. military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. This is no longer theglobal security environment in which BIS is operating. On October 17, 2022, 10 daysafter the Commerce Department announced its new export controls policy towardChina, Secretary of State Antony Blinken gave a
major speech
at Stanford University,stating: “We are at an infl ection point. The post-Cold War world has come to an end,and there is an intense competition underway to shape what comes next. And at theheart of that competition is technology.”
Secretary Blinken is correct. The current era of strategic geopolitical competition iscentered around leadership in technology. BIS plays a vital role in ensuring that U.S.technology is not improperly used by foreign governments in ways that are counter toU.S. national security interests. The new export controls policy demonstrates that theBiden administration understands the critical role that BIS must play in this new era.
However, the same cannot be said for the FY 2023 President’s Budget request or FY2022 congressional appropriation. Neither provides adequate resources for BIS tosucceed in its vital mission of strategic technology competition.
The simple reason why BIS’s enabling technology is in such a sorry state is that theconversation about export controls has been too focused on which items to control at
the expense of focus on what it would take for those controls to be eff ective to theextent required for national security. The U.S. government has
provided
$18.3 billionin weapons and security assistance funding to Ukraine since Russia’s 2022 invasion.While this investment in repelling Russian military aggression is undoubtedlyjustifi ed, Congress should contemplate how many Russian weapons never would havemade it to the battlefi eld for want of U.S. technology if a tiny fraction of that $18.3billion had been invested in BIS between 2014 and 2022.
If given adequate funding, BIS could dramatically enhance the productivityand effi cacy of export controls by applying modern data science and machinelearning technologies.
Improved technology would go a long way toward strengthening BIS’s ability tomanage its key administrative lists, rapidly assess license applications, and eff ectivelyenforce export controls.
BIS enforcement agents engage in open-source intelligence analysis via mainstreamsearch engines and use Excel spreadsheets to comb through data. As one intervieweenoted, enforcement offi cers spend 80 percent of their time looking for data and 20percent of their time analyzing that data. Creating a system yielding the oppositeresults—80 percent analysis and 20 percent data gathering—would be far superior. Inother words, the use of new technology at BIS would be a major force multiplier. Afew noteworthy examples of how modern technology could improve BIS effi cacy andeffi ciency are listed below. These are only a fraction of the total potential.
Automatic analyst alerting of changes that would aff ect the validity of previouslyapproved export licenses (e.g., non-Chinese customer entity was acquired by aChinese company or was identifi ed as a new supplier to the Chinese military)
A rules-based automatic risk-scoring system for evaluating whether a foreign entitybelongs on the lists of parties of concern
Entity resolution capabilities to establish that diff erent entities are likely related(e.g., automatically detecting that a purported Eastern European “tractormanufacturer” has the same phone number as a known supplier of engines to theRussian military)
Data provenance tracing and explainable recommendations to ensure that data canbe used for law enforcement actions
Automatically expanding search queries to include translation into other languages,including alternate spellings and adjustments for diff erent data formats
Allowing for searches based on semantic reasoning in addition to merely keywordmatching (e.g., the diff erence between “X person was witnessed murdering Y” and“X person was a witness to the murder of Y”)
Data fusion into a knowledge graph to allow historically distinct data sets to becross-referenced and searched with a single interface (e.g., linking U.S. exporttransactions to likely re-export transactions in third-party countries)
Transaction monitoring and risk screening
Identity disambiguation in real time across billions of records
Adopting and leveraging this technology requires several steps. First, it requiresharvesting massive open-source data sets. These data sets include but are not limitedto corporate executive registries, shareholder registries, property records, tax fi lings,customs data, shipping and receiving records, vessel ownership data, supply chaindisclosures, court fi lings, government procurement databases, and contract awardnotifi cations. One technology expert interviewed for this project said his AI fi rm is“imagining a world where all public documents are on a map of global documents.”For example, while a tractor company may appear to be owned in Eastern Europe, itcould use commercial systems to obfuscate illicit business operations. Combing datato understand cross-border associations, shareholders, upstream holdings, and otherrelevant information—instantaneously—can reveal that the company is owned by anentity in a country of concern and then fl ag transactions for human review and follow-up.
A second component to leveraging these AI systems is to integrate these open-sourcedata sets with government-restricted ones in a modern data analytics and AI platform.Several government agencies already have technology for the combination of privateand open-source data into one database that is updated in real time or near real time.These capabilities can facilitate the rapid identifi cation of supply chain connections toChinese military end users by reconciling disparate data sources, such as addresses
and mutual proximity of specifi c entities, as well as the specifi c geolocation of cargoships, including those that have turned off location-identifying capabilities.
Third, BIS needs to receive this data in machine-readable formats. Several data fi rmscan take large data sets consisting of billions of records and convert them into“knowledge graphs,” which structure the relationships and networks between data tina way that is computationally optimized for advanced analysis. Breaking down wallsbetween data sets—for example, a shareholder registry in China and shipping andreceiving records in Azerbaijan—can lead the system to generate graphical maps of apossible relationship between these entities and generate red fl ags that initiate humanreview.
These tools enhance
entity resolution capabilities
. Entity resolution cross-checksmultiple data sources to reference the real world, determining the actual identity ofan entity or person. AI systems can analyze billions of records simultaneously byscreening identical addresses, overlapping owners, email addresses, social mediahandles, and other information. These systems can also account for fl ipped dates ofbirth and misspelled addresses, which can be diffi cult for humans to catch.Furthermore, these AI systems can operate in a host of languages, including Burmeseand Mandarin.
The private sector already uses a wide array of technological capabilities to ensurecompliance. Scanning tools are common in the fi nancial services sector, for example,which conducts automated scans of billions of records to detect fraud. It isunreasonable to assume that a fi nancial institution would have humans comb throughthese records in real time or expect results to satisfy consumer demand forsatisfactory fraud prevention.
However, in technology that BIS would adopt, technology providers tend not to“score” the data. In other words, the external technology and data providers do noteff ectively determine whether export control evasion is occurring; they fl ag suspiciousactivity for human review and leave it to the government to take action based on areview of the data. As one AI expert explained in an interview with CSIS, “analgorithm can tell you where the risks are. From there, a group of people caninvestigate these risks closely. Then you can point back to the entire data provenance
and justify how you got to the end result.” One of the key benefi ts of using an AI-basedsystem is that it allows disparate data sources to be woven together instantaneously,vastly increasing the enforcement and investigation capabilities of BIS offi cers.
As the enforcement picture changes and the need to identify and prevent Russiancircumvention accelerates, existing technology off ers the U.S. government anopportunity to adopt new data-mining tools that would considerably expandenforcement capabilities. The adoption and use of this new technology off er dramaticbenefi ts. These include:1.
Substantial Analyst Productivity Increases:
The adoption of new technologycould fl ip the search versus analysis equation, signifi cantly streamlining workfl owsand enforcement capabilities by shifting time spent searching for data to analysis ofdata.2.
Swifter Identifi cation of Circumvention:
Automated systems can comb throughbillions of documents and information sets simultaneously, generating real-time redfl ags.3.
Digitized Auditable Systems:
An auditable system provides a traceable evidencetrail that can justify any subsequent enforcement action and can be upheld incourt.4.
Potential to Reduce the Regulatory Burden:
In 2021, BIS took 26 days onaverage to issue licenses. The adoption of new technology would speed up licensingprocesses and reduce compliance costs over time.5.
Amplifi ed Enforcement Capabilities:
The combination of new enforcementtechnology with existing human resources at BIS would dramatically enhanceoverall export control enforcement capacity at BIS.
Digitizing licensing and enforcement would increase productivity, reduce privatesector burdens, and directly impact the Russian war machine by allowing the real-time cross-checking of large data sets, such as the interagency Automated ExportSystem (AES), against BIS’s internal system, classifi ed intelligence, and open-sourceintelligence.
Evidence from comparable organizations suggests that Congress shouldappropriate no less than $25 million annually for the next fi ve years for BIStechnology modernization.
Based on discussions with members of the U.S. trade, law enforcement, andintelligence communities, as well as private sector technology providers, Congressshould allocate $25 million of funding to BIS annually in addition to the initial systembuildout, updates, training, and maintenance. It will require continued support foryears to come, particularly if the export control enforcement environment becomessubstantially more complex in the future.
An appropriation of $25 million annually for the next fi ve years will help signifi cantlyenhance immediate enforcement capabilities and also improve the speed andaccuracy of export licensing. This fi gure takes into account BIS’s opportunities toimprove collaboration with other U.S. government agencies and the need to preventunnecessary duplication of eff ort. This funding will go toward four primary areas: (1)procuring access to large proprietary and open-source data sets, (2) integrating thosedata sets into a modern data analytics platform, (3) adding additional analyst staff with needed specialist skills to use new technology (e.g., data scientists), and (4)covering staff training costs. Specifi cally, this funding should support the followingmission objectives:
Adopt a more proactive rather than reactive approach to export controls
Leverage a new technology suite to provide real-time data about export controlevasion
Expand the analyst staff and train BIS staff with relevant courses
For ensuing appropriations, it is important that Congress provide suffi cient funding toenable BIS and its data contractors to keep the source code and inputs evergreen,which will necessitate frequent updating and monitoring. Although the adoption ofthis technology will also have signifi cant cost-saving eff ects on staff time andbandwidth, the initial bucket of funding will be needed to train BIS staff to use thenew technology.
Overall, BIS needs an integrated solution that takes inputs from multiple privatesector data vendors, integrates them into a unifi ed data platform (on governmentnetworks or government clouds), performs relevant analytics on the data, andpresents that in a usable user interface for government analysts. Obtaining large datasets such as the ones discussed above is one of the costly elements in standing up adigitized enforcement system. An additional cost involves the disambiguation of datainto a readable format, which represents a separate added cost.
In addition to acquiring the rote data, a core cost will be for BIS to work with externaltechnology providers and contractors to ensure that the data is searchable andreadable, enabling BIS staff to maximize the benefi ts of the technology. Another costrelates to staff training. One interviewee for this project noted that the traininginvolved for export enforcement staff would be minimal, estimating that someonecould learn how to use a new AI system in a matter of hours. However, full utilizationof enforcement technology could vary signifi cantly depending on the technologicalacuity of staff , so BIS will need to hire more specialists and provide additional trainingto existing staff .
Additional funds appropriated by Congress will allow BIS to leverage existing andexternally available technology to support its licensing and enforcement needs. Inaddition to acquiring the rote data, a core cost will be for BIS to work with externaltechnology providers and contractors to ensure that the data is searchable andreadable, enabling BIS staff to maximize the benefi ts of the technology. Expertsbuilding comparable systems for the intelligence community and other federalagencies with similar missions to build, maintain, and staff this technology stackwould cost roughly $25 million annually.
Procuring technology is only part of the solution. Congress needs to appropriatefunds on an annual basis to ensure that BIS staff are able to leverage the technology.Furthermore, funding extra staff will help close ongoing gaps in enforcement,particularly as enforcement needs grow in number and complexity. In other words,simply acquiring new technologies is not a panacea on its own; successful use of newtechnologies depends on the agency’s ability to use them eff ectively.
In addition to the $25 million for technology modernization and analyst staff ,Congress should provide $18.4 million in annual funding for additionalenforcement agents.
Notably, many individuals said that while new technology could radically improve theproductivity of the export administration and enforcement analytic communities,additional resources are likely needed for other parts of the BIS export enforcemententerprise. This is because a more productive enforcement analysis community willidentify more entities as likely shell companies engaging in illicit transactions. Thiswill in turn increase the need for enforcement agents to conduct site inspections orcriminal investigations of these identifi ed entities. Despite the severe currenttechnological limitations on the effi cacy of the analytic community, its work is alreadyidentifying enough candidate entities for inspection to more than fully consume thecapacity of the current staff .
The current criminal investigator cadre is spread too thin to counter threats to U.S.national security. It is routine for a single BIS ECO to be responsible for working withmultiple foreign countries or entire regions. Within the United States, many BISagents have extremely high caseloads with responsibility for conducting far moreinvestigations than they can eff ectively handle. As one interviewee put it, “even if BIShad 500 domestic criminal investigators, they would be overwhelmed with full timework.”
As a result, in addition to the funding for new technology, BIS will also needadditional enforcement agents and funding with which to pay them. Therefore, inaddition to the $25 million annual increase for fi ve years to support new technologyand staff for BIS analytical capabilities, BIS will also require an additional $18.4 millionand 48 positions annually for the Offi ce of Export Enforcement. BIS would alsorequire $1.2 million for additional sensitive compartmented information facility (SCIF)space to support the classifi ed aspects of this program for an overall total of roughly$19.6 million.
Therefore, the total size of the recommended additional budget appropriation is $44.6million annually.
Providing additional funding, staff , and technology capabilities for BIS is awin-win opportunity with a high return on investment for both U.S. exportersand the U.S. government.
While the relatively small staff at BIS has demonstrated its admirable ability to take ona task of massive economic and national security proportions, the adoption of a newdata-driven technology stack could substantially increase export enforcementcapabilities. Given the dramatically expanded 2022 Russia export controls, thechanging geopolitical landscape with China and Taiwan, and increasinglysophisticated smuggling networks, the need for BIS to adopt new data-driven digitaltechnologies for its enforcement eff orts is both clear and urgent.
The evolving geopolitical threat landscape presents Congress with a historicopportunity to couple its support of Ukraine and its defense of democracy with newtechnological capabilities that are more eff ective in identifying circumvention ofexport controls and which also contribute to the long-term degradation of a potentialmilitary adversary.
Compared to the annual $44.6 million cost, the benefi ts of this investment in BIS areextremely attractive. The U.S. government is currently spending tens of billions toassist Ukraine in destroying the weapons of Russia’s military, which too often arepowered by U.S. technology. Providing a few tens of millions of dollars annually to BISto modernize the technology that enables eff ective export controls would go a longway toward ensuring that far fewer Russian and Chinese weapons using U.S.technology are built in the future. The disparity between the meager cost and themassive opportunity is so great that this likely represents one of the opportunitieswith the highest return on investment available anywhere in U.S. national security.
Gregory C. Allen is the director of the Artifi cial Intelligence (AI) Governance Projectand a senior fellow in the Strategic Technologies Program at the Center for Strategicand International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C. Emily Benson is a senior fellowwith the Scholl Chair in International Business at CSIS. William Alan Reinsch is asenior adviser and holds the Scholl Chair in International Business at CSIS.
Center for Strategic and International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Tel: 202.887.0200
Fax: 202.775.3199
MEDIA INQUIRIES
H. Andrew Schwartz
Chief Communications Officer
The authors would like to thank CSIS interns Elizabeth Duncan and Daniel Elizalde fortheir thoughtful input and research assistance.
This report was made possible through generous support from Schmidt Futures andAccrete AI.
This report is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies(CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policyissues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not takespecifi c policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusionsexpressed in this publication should be understood to be solely those of theauthor(s).
© 2022 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rightsreserved.
[1]
Translation by Samuel Bendett, a native Russian speaker and an analyst of Russianmilitary technology, available at
https://twitter.com/SamBendett/status/1557350269146521601?s=20&t=LYSB23e_WNaNdj87GRC1QQ
.